The competition watchdog has said it will investigate the price of PCR Covid tests "immediately".
The health secretary had called for a review into "excessive" pricing and "exploitative practices" among test providers.
Travel industry bosses have blamed the high cost of PCR tests for putting people off travelling abroad.
The Competition and Markets Authority said it would explore whether there are pricing and reliability problems.
It said it will also investigate whether PCR providers are breaching obligations under consumer law and what immediate actions the government needs to take.
Holidaymakers have complained of high prices and missing tests or results from many of the 400 or more firms offering the service.
Tests cost about £75 per person on average but there are reports of some being offered for as little as £20, and others more than £500.
The government publishes a list of companies and clinics offering testing but there have been reports that many have not got full accreditation.
Sajid Javid asked the CMA to investigate, after reports that pricing was in some cases advertised incorrectly and tests were going missing.
The CMA had originally said it would respond to his request "within a month".
This sparked an angry reaction from travel industry bosses who feared no changes before the end of the summer holidays - a critical market for the sector.
George Lusty, CMA senior director for consumer protection, said the issue was "particularly pressing for families hoping to enjoy a well-earned holiday after such a difficult year, and for those reuniting with friends and relatives overseas".
He said: "We will not hesitate to take enforcement action if we find evidence that PCR providers are breaching consumer law."
The CMA was working with the Department for Health and Social Care (DHSC) to identify the cause of any wider problems in the PCR testing market, he said.
And it was providing ongoing support to the DHSC on interim action that could be considered before its work on the PCR testing market is finished, he said.
The cost of NHS coronavirus tests for international arrivals to the UK have been reduced, the government has said.
Test and Trace tests have been cut from £88 to £68 for people arriving from green-listed countries and for those coming from amber-listed countries who are fully vaccinated.
Meanwhile, the price of two tests for amber arrivals who have not had both jabs has been cut from £170 to £136.
The prices of all providers of day two and eight tests are to be reviewed.
It comes after Health Secretary Sajid Javid asked the competition watchdog to investigate "excessive" pricing and "exploitative practices" among PCR Covid test firms.
He said misleading pricing will be clamped down on and providers failing to meet necessary standards will be removed from the government's approved list.
NHS Test and Trace advertises its tests alongside private companies' packages and they are available to purchase to fulfil the government's testing requirements for international travel.
This is the second time the price of NHS tests has been reduced; previously the cost of a day two and eight package was £210.
It is understood that if the review finds private companies are offering terms that are unfair and therefore unenforceable, enforcement action could be taken by the Competition and Markets Authority or Trading Standards.
If businesses are found to have breached consumer law, they could be subject to a court order to stop operating and told to compensate consumers.
"I am determined to protect consumers and hardworking families from exploitative practices and ensure high quality tests are available at a reasonable price," said Mr Javid.
"Too many providers are acting like cowboys and that needs to stop. The public should be allowed to enjoy their summer holidays without having to face excessive costs or anxiety.
"Any provider found to be misleading the public will be kicked off."
Holidaymakers have complained of high prices and poor service from many of the 400-plus firms offering PCR tests and there have been reports that some have not got full accreditation.
According to reports, PCR test prices can range from as little as £20 to more than £500. There have also been complaints from consumers that they have not received test results or have been sent damaged PCR kits.
The government said providers must use laboratories that are either accredited or undergoing accreditation by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service, and that businesses that fail to meet standards will be removed from its list of approved providers.
The CMA has previously said formal investigations can take a long time, but in this instance it will provide advice to Mr Javid with a view to taking swift action.
PCR tests for travel have become "a predictable Covid rip-off", says the former chairman of the Competition and Markets Authority, Lord Tyrie.
Lord Tyrie said the competition regulator had been "too slow to react" to complaints about testing providers.
Holidaymakers have objected to high prices and poor service from many of the 400-plus test firms listed on the government's website.
Tests cost about £75 on average, but prices can reach hundreds.
Last week, Health Secretary Sajid Javid asked the CMA to investigate "excessive" pricing and "exploitative practices" among PCR Covid test firms.
Initially, the CMA said it would take up to a month to report back. But after a chorus of objection from the travel industry, the CMA said it was reviewing the situation "immediately".
Lord Tyrie told the BBC that the CMA "could and should have been better prepared".
"It should either be acting already directly using existing powers. Or if deemed inadequate for the job, it should be advising the government on how to obtain a quick remedy, whether by legislation or by other means," he said.
"This advice should already be with the government."
Lord Tyrie left the competition watchdog last summer after two years in the post, suggesting the role prevented him leading a more aggressive campaign for change.
He added: "The CMA acted much more quickly to quell price-gouging on hand sanitiser and other Covid-related products 18 months ago. Far from building on this success, boldness appears to have taken a back seat."
Lord Tyrie reflected that "the CMA is full of able and highly motivated people, keen to tackle detriment like this".
"Their energies need to be released from an excess of caution at the highest levels," he added.
At the weekend, the cost of NHS coronavirus tests for international arrivals to the UK was reduced. Test and Trace tests were cut from £88 to £68 for people arriving from green-listed countries, as well as for those coming from amber-listed countries who are fully vaccinated.
Meanwhile, the price of two tests for amber arrivals who have not had both jabs has been cut from £170 to £136.
It is understood the price cut is an attempt to drive down the cost across the market, so other operators will follow.
Criticism of the government's decision to implement PCR Covid testing for all UK arrivals has been significant from the travel sector.
Last week, major airports including the Manchester Airport Group and Gatwick Airport, along with tour operator Tui, cited the testing policy as a major barrier to travel restarting and the industry recovering.
The government said its top priority was to protect public health and it continued to work with industry to help them navigate this difficult period.
Lord Tyrie said that the slow response of the CMA was likely to mean it was too late to offer a full remedy to the market before the peak holiday season comes to a close and people return to work and school in September.
But the CMA said: "These comments are inaccurate."
The watchdog said it gave advice to Department of Health and Social Care officials about the PCR testing market in April and "we gave further advice to the secretary of state last week".
A spokesperson for the CMA said: "We continue to work closely with Department of Health and Social Care in reviewing the market and, as we have made clear, we will not hesitate to take enforcement action ourselves if there are breaches of consumer law.
"Since the start of the pandemic, the CMA has secured hundreds of millions of pounds in refunds for people who have been treated unfairly, in sectors including holiday accommodation and package travel."
The health secretary has asked the competition watchdog to investigate "excessive" pricing and "exploitative practices" among PCR Covid test firms.
In a letter to the Competition and Markets Authority, Sajid Javid said it was time for a "rapid high-level" review to protect consumers.
Holidaymakers have complained of huge prices and poor service from many of the 400-plus firms offering PCR tests.
Tests cost about £75 per person on average but prices can reach hundreds.
Mr Javid wrote in his letter to CMA chief executive Andrea Coscelli: "I know that for too many people the cost of PCR testing can act as a barrier, especially for families who want to travel together.
"We have all experienced enormous disruption to our lives over this pandemic but it is not right if some families experience yet further disruption unnecessarily because of potentially unfair practices in the market for private travel tests."
Rather than wait for a long competition investigation, Mr Javid has requested immediate advice from the CMA on how to "stamp out any exploitative behaviour in this market".
The government publishes a list of companies and clinics offering testing but there have been reports that many have not got full accreditation.
There are reports of PCR tests being offered for as little as £20, and more than £500. In addition to complaints about high charges, consumers have also reported not receiving test results or of being sent damaged PCR kits.
Avi Lasarow, chief executive of Covid testing company Prenetics, said the decision to investigate excessive pricing was "long overdue".
"Companies on the government list must be responsible in their pricing strategies," he said.
"The list has been exploited by some testing providers luring in consumers with misleading prices and then offering tests that are up to nine times more expensive."
Mr Lasarow said the "easiest way" to make tests cheaper would be for the government to axe VAT on holiday Covid tests.
"If VAT was removed, a family of four flying from London to Majorca could save £166 - which would pay for the cost of the flights," he said.
A spokesperson for the CMA said that as formal investigations can take a long time, in this instance it will provide advice to Mr Javid with a view to taking swift action.
"We are aware of concerns about the evolving markets for Covid-19 tests for international travellers. We look forward to providing the Secretary of State with advice on how best to ensure that travellers have access to tests that are affordable and reliable," the CMA said.
The government has been under pressure from the travel industry and its own MPs to ditch the costly PCR tests.
Willie Walsh, former boss of British Airways and now director general of the International Air Travel Association, has accused PCR firms of "profiteering".
And last week, Conservative MP Huw Merriman, chairman of the Transport Select Committee, tweeted: "Passengers are being ripped off with expensive PCR tests."
Here are five things you need to know about the coronavirus pandemic this Saturday morning. We'll have another update for you tomorrow.
The cost of NHS coronavirus tests for international arrivals to the UK has been reduced, the government says. NHS Test and Trace tests have been cut from £88 to £68 for people arriving from green-listed countries and for those from amber-listed countries who are fully vaccinated. Meanwhile, the price of two tests for amber arrivals who have not had both jabs has been cut from £170 to £136.
Parents of clinically extremely vulnerable children have told of their struggles to access vaccines for them, nearly four weeks after they were added to the rollout. At-risk 12 to 15-year-olds and those living with someone with a weak immune system became eligible on 19 July. NHS England says vaccinations will start from 23 August at the latest. But families and GPs have told the BBC they are frustrated by a lack of information.
All civil servants in Canada must be vaccinated by the end of October or risk losing their jobs, the government has announced. The mandate also applies to workers in federally regulated sectors, like rail. Canada has one of the highest Covid vaccination rates in the world, with 81% of eligible people having received at least one dose.
Three educators in Florida's second-largest school district have died from Covid-19 within two days of each other, teachers' union officials say. The deaths come just days before Broward County schools are due to reopen on 18 August. Florida's Republican governor has threatened to withhold pay from school leaders who require masks for pupils, amid fierce debate over school virus protocols.
A man who is about to celebrate his 101st birthday but has been unable to see his daughter, in part because of the pandemic, has been sent hundreds of cards and gifts. Jack Annall, from Halifax, was disappointed that his daughter Mary was unable to visit him from Australia. When care home manager Vicky Gudgin appealed for cards to be sent to Mr Annall, more than 500 people responded.
Get a longer daily news briefing from the BBC in your inbox, each weekday morning, by signing up here.
From Monday 16 August, fully vaccinated people in England and Northern Ireland will no longer have to self-isolate after close contact with an infected person. See what the rule change means for you. - and what is happening in the rest of the UK.
Find further information, advice and guides on our coronavirus page.
What questions do you have about coronavirus?
In some cases, your question will be published, displaying your name, age and location as you provide it, unless you state otherwise. Your contact details will never be published. Please ensure you have read our terms & conditions and privacy policy.
Use this form to ask your question:
If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or send them via email to YourQuestions@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any question you send in.
The cost of coronavirus testing for holidaymakers has been cut amid growing pressure from the travel industry.
Randox, one of the biggest suppliers of PCR tests under the UK's "testing for travel" scheme, has reduced the price from £100 to £60.
But travel organisation Abta warned that the cost was still a "significant restriction".
Other industry figures including the boss of Easyjet have said the requirement could price out travellers.
Foreign holidays are currently banned, and returning travellers have to quarantine on arrival. The earliest possible date for foreign travel from England has previously been given as 17 May, but it has not been confirmed.
The first ministers of Scotland and Wales have argued that it is too early for foreign holidays.
For England, destination countries will be in one of three categories (green, amber or red) and each one will require passengers to take a pre-departure Covid test as well as a PCR test on return to the UK.
Consumer group Which? has estimated that each PCR test - which is just one of the tests needed - could cost about £120 per person.
Mark Tanzer, chief executive of the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA), said that although one of the leading suppliers had cut costs, "£60 is still a lot of money" - particularly for families of four or five.
He added that a "better solution is to not have a PCR test", speaking in front of the Transport Select Committee.
MPs also questioned why PCR tests are typically up to 80% cheaper overseas.
Mr Tanzer said: "I can't see anything in the UK that is different about PCR that means it is more expensive there than elsewhere".
Criticism has come from other parts of the industry looking to salvage a key period of summer trade.
Johan Lundgren, the chief executive of Easyjet, said on Wednesday: "Easyjet was founded to make travel accessible for all and so we continue to engage with government to ensure that the cost of the required testing is driven down".
Mr Lundgren added that may "risk turning back the clock and make travel too costly for some".
The airline also said that many European countries were planning to resume flying "at scale" in May.
Bookings for summer travel, dependent on restrictions easing, will help boost the airline's finances which have been squeezed during the pandemic.
Passenger numbers for the six months to 31 March fell by 89% to 4.1 million. This led to total group revenue for the same period dropping by 90% to £235m, while it expects a pre-tax loss of £690-730m.
Easyjet said that has enough flexibility to "significantly ramp capacity up or down quickly", according to demand for flights.
"Customers are booking closer to departure and visibility remains limited", it said. But overall between April and the end of June, it expects to fly up to 20% of 2019 capacity levels.
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps recently told the BBC that for the first time he was not "advising against booking foreign holidays".
"Yes, you'll want to check what the situation is in two or three weeks' time when that list [of countries] - the green, amber, red, is produced - you'll want to know that you've got good holiday insurance and flexible flights and the rest of it.
"But for the first time I think there is light at the end of the tunnel and we'll be able to restart international travel, including cruises by the way, in a safe and secure way, knowing about the vaccinations, everything we know about the disease this year, and of course that abundance of caution - having the tests in place."
The government has said it would work with airlines, travel firms and the test providers to see whether prices of tests can be reduced.
That could involve cheaper tests, or the government providing the pre-departure tests.
The cost of Covid tests required as part of international travel to Wales has been criticised.
The Welsh government wants people to use specific NHS PCR tests with results fed directly into NHS Wales' system - costing £88 for one test and £170 for two - but in England people can shop around and pay less than £50 per test.
Travellers have said it is "unfair" that people must pay more in Wales.
The Welsh government said prices for NHS tests were the same across the UK.
There is a fine of £1,000 in Wales for using a private test provider instead.
The Welsh system also applies to travellers flying into and from an airport in another part of the UK before returning to Wales.
The Welsh government has advised people "should only travel abroad for essential reasons".
Helen Flowers, 41, from Dinas Powys, Vale of Glamorgan, said it was "unfair" that she could have to pay more for PCR tests after flying from Cardiff Airport than those living over the border and flying from Bristol Airport.
"It doesn't sit with me right, especially when the price they are quoting is significantly higher than choosing another company," said the finance worker.
She spotted the cheaper test prices over the border when considering travelling to Spain to visit her parents.
"I just think it's wrong," said Ms Flowers, who has postponed the trip until the Welsh government has eased its advice against non-essential overseas travel.
Mary Baldwin, 68, and husband Russell, 81, returned to Wales from Spain on Saturday, and they are now isolating at their home in Penperlleni, Monmouthshire.
"Why are we not having the same choice as English residents?" Mrs Baldwin asked.
"I don't believe the Welsh public know about this. It's a lot of money."
The retired travel agent said she was "furious" that the choice available in England was not available in Wales.
"We need that cost to come down," she said.
As well as proof of a negative test prior to travel, overseas arrivals to Wales must also have proof that they have ordered "NHS Wales Test, Trace, Protect" tests to be taken after their return, using a specific booking portal.
The tests cost £88 for one for green list locations and £170 for two after a visit to amber list areas which also require people to self-isolate for 10 days.
Scotland uses the same system as Wales but travellers arriving in England and Northern Ireland can choose from dozens of third party suppliers, with some charging £48 for one test and £96 for a pair.
Those arriving from amber list locations have to take two tests - one by day two and the other from day eight of their return - and must currently isolate for at least 10 days.
In England, people can also pay for a test after day five and, providing their Covid-19 result is negative, they would no longer have to remain in isolation under the UK government's Test to Release scheme.
It was announced on Thursday that, from 19 July, fully vaccinated UK residents arriving in England from amber travel list destinations will no longer have to quarantine. But they will still need to pay for Covid tests before and after their return.
The Welsh government is still considering whether to follow this move by the UK government.
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) test swabs are sent to a laboratory for analysis.
In Wales, the NHS test results are "sent directly into NHS Wales' systems", according to the Welsh government's website.
People cannot travel directly to Wales if they have visited or passed through a red-list country.
A Welsh government spokesman said: "In order to enter the UK you must be able to show proof of a post-arrival test.
"Tests should be booked through the CTM web portal.
"CTM are the booking agent for NHS Test Trace Protect tests which are processed through the UK Lighthouse Laboratory network, they are not the test provider.
"The price for these NHS tests is the same across the UK.
"If you arrive in Wales without proof of a test booking, you could be fined £2,000.
"If you arrive in Wales and have booked tests with a private test provider, you could be fined £1,000."
More people are being offered free rapid coronavirus tests.
The government says regular testing is essential to stop the spread of Covid now that restrictions have eased across most of the UK.
It's hoped the rapid tests - known as lateral flow tests - can help stop individual cases from becoming outbreaks, now that social distancing limits have been lifted in England, Scotland and Wales.
Estimates vary, but it's thought as many as one in two people who have coronavirus might not have any symptoms, despite being infectious.
Some businesses and venues are also asking customers to test before using their services.
Anyone without symptoms in England can get free tests from testing sites, pharmacies or through the post.
If you test at home, you are asked to report your results online or by calling 119.
Patients in England can now see all registered test results in the NHS Covid app as well as details of their vaccination status.
Regular lateral flow testing is also widely used in England for frontline NHS, care home and school staff and in some other workplaces, plus for some secondary school pupils.
Anyone in Scotland can order lateral flow test kits online or collect them from local testing centres.
In addition, people visiting the Scottish islands from the mainland are advised to take two lateral flow tests - the first three days before travel, and the second on the day of departure.
Scotland has also expanded its workplace testing programme. The scheme was originally targeted at key parts of the public and private sector where there was a high risk of transmission. Now any businesses with 10 or more employees can sign up.
Many people without symptoms can now get lateral flow tests in Wales, including volunteers, those who cannot work from home and people due to travel. Tests can be ordered online or collected from most pharmacies.
All businesses in Northern Ireland can get rapid tests for all their staff. People travelling to Northern Ireland from the rest of the UK are advised to test before departure and after arrival, but this is not law.
They involve swabbing your nose and/or throat, then dipping the swab in a fluid.
This is then dropped onto a plastic device - a bit like a pregnancy test.
A line appears on a paper strip to show the test has worked. A second line appears if you have the virus.
If you get a positive result from a lateral flow test anywhere in the country, you and your household have a legal obligation to self-isolate immediately.
You should get a PCR (polymerase chain reaction) test as soon as possible to confirm the result.
This can be booked online, or by phone - 119 in England, Wales or Northern Ireland, or 0300 303 2713 in Scotland.
PCR test swabs are sent to a lab for analysis, with the result in 24-48 hours.
Anyone across the UK who has Covid symptoms - a new continuous cough, high temperature, or change in sense of taste or smell also has a legal obligation to self-isolate immediately.
You must do a PCR test as soon as possible. You can order a test kit to be sent to your home or book an appointment at a walk-in or drive-through test site.
You must not leave home until you get your test results, except to post a test kit or for a PCR test appointment.
Lateral flow tests are less sensitive than PCR tests, and can miss more cases, especially in people with mild infections.
However the government says that for every 1,000 lateral flow tests carried out, there was less than one false positive result.
False positives are equally rare for PCR tests.
But they can still cause problems. If lots of people get tested when there is very little virus in circulation, you might get more false positives than true positives, which can distort infection rates.
Extra Covid tests have been offered in specific areas where new variants of coronavirus have been found, or where cases are rising rapidly.
People without symptoms who live or work in the relevant local authority area, postcode or even street are asked to take a PCR test. The idea is to identify new forms of Covid at the very earliest stage, and stop them spreading.
Currently, no area of England is running surge testing operations.
But if that changes and you need to be tested, you will be contacted by your local council.
The Competition and Markets Authority has told the BBC it warned government officials that consumers could face risks from the fast-growing Covid PCR testing industry in April and May.
The business and competition regulator said it provided advice and market analysis to officials from the Department of Health and Social Care.
It said the advice detailed potential market and consumer risks.
It comes after the CMA was criticised by its former chairman this week.
Lord Tyrie told the BBC that the situation with PCR testing for travel was a 'predictable Covid rip-off', and that the competitions watchdog hadn't done enough.
The government has said it was provided with some general market analysis from the CMA on the potential implications for the PCR testing market and that its advice informed the government's approach on the private provider list.
The CMA said it cannot disclose this information.
The revelation comes after a summer of complaints from travellers and holidaymakers who have taken a holiday or visited family who they've been cut off from because of the pandemic.
The UK government has made it a condition of any international travel that tests before travel, and on your arrival in the UK are mandatory.
The number of tests that are needed is dependent on your arrival from either a green or amber country or your vaccination status. Arrivals from red countries must still use quarantine hotel facilities.
Some of the most common complaints from travellers mention tests listed on the government's list of providers that don't exist at the price advertised whilst others allege poor service.
At the start of August, the Health Secretary asked the competition watchdog to investigate "excessive" pricing and "exploitative practices" among PCR Covid test firms.
In a letter to the CMA, Sajid Javid said it was time for a "rapid high-level" review to protect consumers.
The BBC understands that a full CMA market study or investigation would require a formal consultation before an investigation could be launched and these investigations typically last between 6 and 18 months. Therefore, a wholesale reform of the market could be difficult because of time constraints.
It is understood that due to the time and process needed for a full review of the market, the Government was advised it is better placed to tackle immediate issues in this market.
The travel industry has been demanding action, after complaining about the 'onerous' level of testing in place, which they believe is a barrier to passenger revival.
But, given the lateness of any government intervention, and the impact on the travel sector, people in industry believe the damage has already been done.
Julie Lo Bue Said, chief executive of Advantage Travel Partnership, the UK's largest group of independent leisure & business travel agent experts, said "it feels like a PR exercise for the government to come out and say 'we're looking at this now'.
"It is far too late, when the public has had to pay for all these tests," she added.
On Friday, Sajid Javid, the Health Secretary announced that the price of PCR Covid tests provided by NHS Test & Trace for travel would fall, by £20 for one test to £68, and by £35 for two tests to £138.
The Government has consistently maintained that testing for travellers is in place to protect public health.
One of the bigger providers of Covid PCR test kits has responded after images of overflowing drop boxes were shared online.
The firm, Randox, said it was increasing the number of drop boxes and the frequency of box collections.
The move comes after people posted pictures of returned test kits piled high on top of drop boxes in Sutton and Hampstead over the weekend.
One MP said the "pointless" tests were "becoming a bad joke".
At least one PCR test is required for all arrivals from international destinations within two days of landing in the UK.
Those returning from green listed countries, or who are fully vaccinated and returning from amber list countries, are required to take only one.
However, those not fully vaccinated from amber list destinations must take at least two tests, one on day two and one on day eight.
One of those affected, Gavin Marshall, said he had to drop off a test kit on behalf of his daughter, who had completed a PCR test two days after returning from a holiday in Portugal.
Despite the fact that the box was full, he said: "I had no choice but to leave the sample at that site, because there wasn't enough time to get to another drop box before collection deadline."
Mr Marshall called it a "Covid travel rip-off".
Rory Boland, Which? Travel Editor, said he had seen problems with several testing firms and an increase in every type of complaint. Complaints included tests not arriving on time, people being unable to book tests and misleading prices.
"It's particularly frustrating as Which? raised this with government a few months ago," he added.
"The system isn't set up for large numbers of people travelling and now many people are travelling the system is not working properly. The government might now say it is looking into the prices of tests, but it's very late in the day and these problems were foreseeable."
Labour MP Ben Bradshaw tweeted in reaction to the photos: "These pointless rip-off day two PCR tests for people returning from amber and green list countries, most of which have a fraction of our Covid-19 rates, are becoming a bad joke."
A government spokesperson said health secretary Sajid Javid had asked the competition watchdog to investigate excessive pricing and said it was working with testing providers to reduce costs.
Nancy Diaz was due to fly to Barcelona on 21 July. When her test arrived, she registered it and delivered it to a Randox Health drop box in Edinburgh, two days before her flight.
However, Ms Diaz said she only received confirmation that her test had arrived at the company's laboratory the following evening, meaning she knew her results were not going to come through in time for her flight.
Due to the delay, Ms Diaz rebooked her flight for 24 hours later, however, when she received her negative test result at 13:26 BST on 21 July, the day she had originally planned to fly on, she was required to do another test at Edinburgh Airport as her original test results were now outside of the 72-hour window.
"I was given no refund, as they (Randox) claim the 24 hours promise is from when the test arrives at their lab, which can be whenever, apparently," said Ms Diaz.
"The fact that the test can take more than 24 hours to arrive to their lab was not mentioned."
Lizzy Merrall ordered tests for her parents and for herself on 19 July, ahead of a family holiday to Spain on 27 July.
Her parents' tests arrived, but her pre-departure test she needed to take with her on holiday to do before flying back to the UK did not.
"I contacted Randox on the 26 July asking where my tests were," she told the BBC.
"I asked them if they could at least offer me a refund for one of the tests but they never replied to me and I had to pay £80 for a last minute test."
Ms Merrrall said her test pack only arrived once she was already on holiday in Spain.
Randox has not responded to requests for comment in relation to Ms Diaz's and Ms Merrall's experiences.
A spokesperson for the Northern Ireland-based company said it was "constantly expanding and improving its Covid-19 testing capacity and associated logistics network, which is already the largest in the United Kingdom, to meet the rapidly growing demand resulting from the loosening of travel restrictions".
"Randox continues to increase the number of drop boxes across the United Kingdom, which already totals over 200, and is increasing the frequency of box collections which are already occurring multiple times per day," they added.
"Randox is providing premium testing services in dynamic and rapidly changing circumstances and is committed to continuously improving its logistics network, to ensure that international travellers receive their results in time. All of the sample kits pictured will be processed."
PCR tests are more expensive than lateral flow tests and have been criticised by some in the travel industry for pricing many potential travellers out.
The government has previously defended their use, saying they are useful as they can be sequenced to check for variants of concern, unlike lateral flow tests.
But some have criticised the government, saying they are not sequencing enough tests.
Last week, Conservative MP Huw Merriman, chair of the Transport select committee, said they should be dropped.
"PCR tests can be two to three times the cost of lateral flow testing. It's pricing out holidays for those that don't have the means to pay for those tests," he said.
"I wouldn't mind if the tests were going to be used for sequencing, so we can find all variants of concern, but if only 5% of PCR tests are being sequenced, then surely it's a complete waste of money."
The Department for Health and Social Care (DHSC) has highlighted that as the vast majority of travellers into the UK do not test positive, their tests are not sent for sequencing.
Of those sent for sequencing, a minority contain insufficient virus, but more than 95% of viable green and amber tests are sequenced, it said.
A DHSC spokesperson said: "All positive tests for arrivals from red list countries are sequenced and there is a legal requirement for private testing providers to sequence positive PCR tests for amber or green country travellers.
"We are already a world leader in genomics, with over 600,000 positive Covid-19 samples having been sequenced during this pandemic."
Thyrocare, a private diagnostic laboratory in India, had just started testing for Covid-19, when the Supreme Court ordered all tests to be carried out free.
We thought the order would say the rich would pay, and the government would pay for the poor, says Arokiaswamy Velumani, Thyrocare's founder.
At 4,500 rupees ($59; £47), it's not a cheap test. But the court did not clarify if and how private labs would be reimbursed. Panic stricken, some, including Thyrocare, put testing on hold.
An anxious federal government petitioned the court to reconsider - which it did.
According to the new order, issued on 13 April, the government will reimburse private labs for testing the 500 million people covered by a flagship public health insurance scheme. The rest would have to pay.
But the volte-face sparked a bigger question: can India scale up testing for Covid-19 if it's not free?
A steep price tag
India's numbers - 15,712 active cases and 507 deaths - are relatively low for a country of 1.3bn. Many believe this is because it's still testing too little - as of Sunday there had been 386,791.
But scaling up is a challenge. The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has approved only one homegrown testing kit so far, imports are delayed because of a global surge in demand, and the protective gear and medical staff required to conduct tests are in short supply. Also the sheer size of India's population, and the resources needed to reach every corner of the country, is daunting.
All of this has made testing expensive. It's free at government hospitals and labs - and for months they were the only ones permitted to even test for coronavirus. But soon private players were roped in to support India's underfunded and struggling public health system.
The government capped the price of a test at 4,500 rupees at home, or 3,500 rupees in a hospital, based on the recommendations of an expert committee including heads of private health firms.
But the figure, says Malini Aisola, from the All India Drug Action Network, a health sector watchdog, is "arbitrary". One virologist said when he calculated the cost, it worked out to around 700 rupees.
"If the private sector was part of the process of deciding the cost, the government should release the breakdown, argues Ms Aisola.
But private lab owners say it's a fair price. The supply chains are clogged - everyone is working on advance payments, says Zoya Brar, founder and CEO of Core Diagnostics.
She says that the basic RT-PCR test kit - widely used to diagnose HIV and influenza - costs around 1,200 rupees. And this is supplemented with an extraction kit, used to pull DNA and RNA, another kind of genetic code, from the sample.
This is in short supply and when it's available, we're getting it for around 1,000 rupees, which is a blessing. And then, she adds, there are the overheads - personal protective equipment (PPE) for staff; employees' salaries; and the cost of running the lab overall.
Thyrocare's Dr Velumani says he is also paying higher salaries than usual because staff are being pressured to stop working by their families who are scared they may contract the virus.
The case for free testing
Right now, Indians are getting tested only if a doctor advises them to do so. But the long wait at government hospitals, and the prohibitive cost at private ones, could deter even those with symptoms from showing up.
If you want to contain a pandemic, you can't have testing determined by cost, says Jayati Ghosh, an economics professor at Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University.
And making it free only for the poorest Indians doesn't help either, according to some economists.
There's a big chunk of people just above the poverty line that are also struggling and there are middle-class workers who have been laid off and can't afford to pay for their families to get tested, says Vivek Dehejia, an economist.
More importantly, the asymptomatic nature of the virus in many people means that India may soon have no choice but to begin mass testing.
If you really want to push up testing rates across the country, you can't expect everyone to pay out of their pockets - for themselves and their families - especially if they're not showing any symptoms, Mr Dehejia says.
Singapore and South Korea have both been lauded for their aggressive testing, which is funded by the government. Vietnam, perhaps more comparable to India, has focused more on isolating infected people, but the government still foots the bill for testing.
You cannot contain the virus unless you know who has it, says Prof Ghosh. So it's in your interest to make sure there is universal access [to testing].
Who should pay?
Economists who spoke to the BBC made a range of suggestions - including employers chipping in, and insurance covering it - but all seemed to agree the government should do more.
Already, it is paying for the lion's share of testing, however, Mr Dehejia says it should "encourage and subsidise free testing".
You cannot rely on private charity to get you out of an international public health emergency.
But India's health sector is poorly funded - it receives just about 1.3% of GDP - and is largely unregulated. Health insurance is not mandatory, and the market is fragmented - most policies cover hospitalisation but not diagnosis or medicines.
And now with private hospitals in the mix, it's going to be harder for the government to retain control of its testing strategy. A prominent hospital chain has just made testing mandatory at the time of admission, which runs counter to current guidelines, recommending testing only for those with symptoms or who have come in contact with a positive case.
Of course, testing could become cheaper as more homegrown kits are approved, and supply outstrips demand. Some states are also experimenting with standardised collection points - such as mobile centres or kiosks - which means fewer PPE suits and lower transport costs.
India is also considering pool testing, which involves collecting a large number of samples and testing them in one go. If the test is negative, nobody has the virus but if it's positive, everyone who gave a sample has to be tested individually.
It's definitely a good way to reduce costs - as long as it's done efficiently and smartly, Ms Brar says.
But the more immediate solution, she says, is to perhaps regulate prices.
If you can fix the price of the raw materials, you can fix the overall price.
Welsh Tories have accused Sir Keir Starmer of "hypocrisy" over Covid test costs for people returning to Wales from foreign countries.
Labour's UK leader told ITV News many travellers feel "they're being ripped off" by PCR test costs in England.
He called on UK ministers in England to make tests available "cheaply or free".
The tests are more expensive in Wales because the Welsh Labour government insists that residents must use specific NHS PCR tests on their return.
There is a fine of £1,000 for using a private test provider instead.
In Wales one PCR test costs £88 and it's £170 for two, but in England people can shop around for private providers and pay less than £50 per test.
First Minister Mark Drakeford rejected calls to change the policy last month.
Welsh ministers are urging people not to travel abroad for holidays this summer and he said: "I don't intend to divert the activities of my officials into making it easier for people to do something that the Welsh government so clearly thinks is unadvisable."
The Welsh Conservatives have renewed the call for a change in approach, urging Wales' Health Minister Eluned Morgan, to "take action to drive down the price of Covid tests so Welsh families do not pay over the odds to travel abroad".
The Welsh Tories accused Sir Keir of hypocrisy in a statement issued on Wednesday.
Responding to the Labour leader's criticism of the English system, Welsh Conservative leader, Andrew RT Davies, said: "Just wait until Sir Keir Starmer hears about how much [they're] charging for tests in Labour-run Wales, where prices start from £88, over £10 more than the English average.
"But we shouldn't expect anything less from Labour who are making it harder for working families in Wales to travel abroad, ensuring it is only an activity available to the wealthiest in our society."
"Once again, Starmer is happy to criticise his opponents in Westminster while turning a blind eye to what his own party are doing in Cardiff Bay."
The Labour Party has been asked to comment.
The UK's largest tour operator has announced that it will subsidise the cost of Covid testing for customers who book its package holidays.
Tui Group is offering test packages for between £20 and £90, to make holidays more affordable.
Other holiday companies are also offering testing deals, including EasyJet, Jet2 and British Airways.
However, consumer group Which? is concerned there may not be enough capacity to fulfil tests.
Every traveller will need to take at least one PCR test after returning to the UK, according the government's outlined plans for reopening travel, and those who have travelled to countries considered higher risk will need to take up to three tests.
As well as the subsidised test packages, that would include PCR and lateral flow tests, Tui said it is was also including free Covid insurance on all holidays.
The firm said it was aware that some customers might need to change their holiday dates, for example if they did not receive their test results on time, or if the country they were going to was moved by the government from green to amber under its "traffic light" travel system.
The travel operator said it would allow free amendments to all holiday bookings up to 14 days before departure and would refund money paid for extra tests, if a country was moved from the amber to green list after booking.
While Tui is not the first firm to announce a subsidised testing package, it is undercutting deals elsewhere. Other travel firms are offering testing packages for between £60 and £210 per person.
"It is a fantastic value for consumers - it's the cheapest test package out there," Rory Boland, travel editor at consumer association Which?, told the BBC.
"The biggest risk is if you book your holiday and test, and the test doesn't come back on time. So this gives you confidence."
Which? found the average cost to consumers of a single PCR test to be about £120 per person.
However, he has concerns about the idea of making consumers shop around for Covid tests: "It's reducing competition in the industry - really, you need to have cheaper tests available to all consumers, not just if they book through a big holiday company."
Which? has seen an increasing amount of complaints over recent months from consumers saying they had not received their tests, or test results, despite spending up to £500 per person to pay for a package of tests.
The consumer association started its own investigation and spoke to the firms on the government's approved list of private Covid testing partners.
"We were told anonymously by many that the system is broken and at risk of being overwhelmed, because it's not organised properly and it lacks capacity," Mr Boland said.
Almost no one is travelling now, but Which? is concerned about what will happen when British consumers decide to go on summer holidays if restrictions are relaxed after 17 May.
"In just a couple of weeks, there could be hundreds of thousands of people trying to use the system," Mr Boland warned.
"If it can't cope now, it won't cope then - no way."
Which? wants to see the government step in and make sure consumers all have access to standardised tests at one price point, rather than having to shop around.
"It's ridiculous to ask consumers to shop around for test providers, given the importance of what the testing is there to protect us against," he said.
"All test providers should be good and that is the government's responsibility."
Here are five things you need to know about the coronavirus pandemic this Tuesday morning. We'll have another update for you this evening.
Under current travel rules, people must take coronavirus tests - but the cost has drawn criticism from many quarters. Now the ex-chairman of the Competition and Markets Authority, Lord Tyrie, says PCR tests for travel - which cost about £75 on average but in some cases can be in the hundreds - have become "a predictable Covid rip-off". Health Secretary Sajid Javid has asked for an investigation and the competition regulator, which describes the cost of PCR testing as a pressing issue, is reviewing the situation.
UK job vacancies hit a record 953,000 in the three months to July, according to official figures. Unemployment fell to 4.7% in the three months to June, down slightly on the previous quarter, while average pay rose 7.4%, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said. Deputy statistician Jonathan Athow said the "world of work continues to rebound robustly" from the pandemic.
Ordering food and drink online or via apps is popular and has become commonplace during the pandemic, but do you think about what personal information you're handing over and why it's being requested? The Information Commissioner's Office, which oversees data privacy, says people should think about the data they are giving out and that sharing those details is a choice.
With nowhere to sleep, Jo and her five-year-old daughter found themselves riding around on the night bus until morning. After that night, she borrowed money from a friend. "She would text me but I could not pay - the relationship soured," says Jo, which is not her real name. She is one of the millions of people who borrow money from family and friends - a scenario that has increased during the pandemic. Read more here.
Air travel is getting back off the ground now that coronavirus restrictions have eased, but around a quarter of the world's passenger jets remain idle. They'll either fly again, be put in storage or disassembled. With about 200 parts for older models and up to 1,200 components or more on newer ones, how do you recycle a jumbo jet? We've taken a look.
Get a longer daily news briefing from the BBC in your inbox, each weekday morning, by signing up here.
It's not long now until schools reopen for the next academic year, so what will the new term be like? Find out here.
Find further information, advice and guides on our coronavirus page.
What questions do you have about coronavirus?
In some cases, your question will be published, displaying your name, age and location as you provide it, unless you state otherwise. Your contact details will never be published. Please ensure you have read our terms & conditions and privacy policy.
Use this form to ask your question:
Everyone in England is to be given access to two rapid coronavirus tests a week from Friday, under an extension of the government's testing programme.
The lateral flow kits, which can provide results in around 30 minutes, will be available for free at testing sites, pharmacies and through the post.
The health secretary said it would help squash any outbreaks as lockdown eases.
But critics of the programme say it risks becoming a "scandalous" waste of money.
It comes as Boris Johnson is due to meet the cabinet to sign off the next stage of lockdown easing in England, which will see non-essential shops reopen and pubs and restaurants start serving outdoors from 12 April.
Later, the prime minister will hold a Downing Street briefing, where he is expected to confirm countries will be graded under a traffic light system when international leisure travel resumes.
He is also set to outline plans for coronavirus passports - recording whether people had been vaccinated, recently tested negative or had natural immunity - as a means of enabling mass-audience events to take place in the future.
However, dozens of MPs oppose the use of Covid passports and Mr Johnson faces the prospect of a rebellion among a number of senior Conservatives if he proceeds with them.
Lateral flow tests are already available for school children and their families to take at home as well as for those who have to leave home for work.
The prime minister hailed the plan to offer everyone testing from 9 April, saying: "As we continue to make good progress on our vaccine programme and with our road map cautiously easing restrictions under way, regular rapid testing is even more important to make sure those efforts are not wasted."
Health minister Edward Argar told BBC Breakfast he expected the lateral flow tests to be used by those returning to work in the coming weeks as the "economy starts opening up again".
He said fewer than one in every 1,000 lateral flow tests gave a false positive result and refused to set an "arbitrary" date for when testing would end.
Mr Argar said the tests would be paid for as part of NHS Test and Trace's funding of £37bn over two years, with 80% of that expected to be used for testing.
The rapid tests are aimed at those without any Covid symptoms and can be taken at home.
The government introduced lateral flow testing for secondary school children and staff earlier this year, under plans to reopen classes in England by March.
In February, the scheme was extended to the families of all school and college-age children in England.
Kits were also offered to those who cannot work from home in the pandemic, so they can be tested twice a week.
From 9 April, kits will be available through:
Anyone who tests positive using a lateral flow test will be expected to self-isolate along with their household. They can then order a second PCR Covid test, typically used for symptomatic cases, which will be sent off to a laboratory for analysis.
If the confirmatory test comes back negative, their quarantine period is considered over immediately and they can resume normal life.
The schools testing programme, combined with the wider use of workplace testing, has led to a jump in the number of lateral flow tests carried out in England.
There were about 250,000 rapid tests a day taken in mid-February - climbing to more than a million a day by the end of March.
Dr Susan Hopkins, Covid-19 strategic response director at Public Health England, said rapid testing might find cases that would not otherwise be discovered, helping to break chains of transmission and suppress the spread of variants or mutations of coronavirus.
The Department of Health said parents may wish to consider testing children under the age of 11 but the current Public Health England advice was that there was a "limited public health benefit from testing primary school age children with lateral flow devices".
Health Secretary Matt Hancock said: "Around one in three people who have Covid-19 show no symptoms, and as we reopen society and resume parts of life we have missed, regular rapid testing is going to be fundamental in helping us quickly spot positive cases and squash any outbreaks."
Shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, said any expansion of the testing scheme must be backed by financial support so people could self-isolate, adding: "Lack of adequate sick pay and support remains a dangerous hole in our defences against this horrific virus."
The latest data shows that, of the 4.2 million lateral flow tests taken in schools and colleges in the week from 18 to 24 March, 4,502 returned a positive result.
Critics of the programme say that when rates are at low levels, it makes it hard to distinguish between actual infections and so-called "false positives" - an error where the test registers a positive result incorrectly.
"Mass testing is a scandalous waste of money," said Allyson Pollock, professor of public health at Newcastle University.
"When the prevalence rate of coronavirus falls as low as it is at the moment then an increasing proportion of cases are likely to be false positives meaning that cases and contacts will self isolate unnecessarily."
Prof Pollock said it is likely that mass testing "is going to do more harm than good" and there had been no evaluation of mass testing programmes by the government.
The government requires secondary school children to take a second PCR or lab test if their first rapid lateral flow test comes back positive in school.
Parents and scientists had warned some pupils were self-isolating unnecessarily after just returning to the classroom.
The government said that for every 1,000 lateral flow tests carried out, there was less than one false positive result, and the rapid tests were particularly useful at detecting high levels of virus.
In Northern Ireland, a spokesperson for the department of health said rapid testing was recently extended to private sector firms with more than 50 staff, and "consideration may be provided to other sectors".
The Scottish government said it was expanding rapid testing in hospitals, care homes, schools and in the community to spot asymptomatic cases in high prevalence areas, while also "considering the implications" of the announcement in England.
The Welsh government said 22% of the population already had access to regular rapid testing and this would continue to grow with the expansion of workplace and community testing programmes.
There are still "serious problems" among private Covid testing firms, with rogue operators making misleading claims, says consumer group Which?.
Most travellers to the UK are required to pre-book tests for day two and day eight after their return.
But several test providers on a government approved list are offering misleading information about pricing and availability, Which? found.
The Department for Health said it was carefully monitoring test providers.
Problems with private test providers first came to light in April when there was an increase in the number of people travelling. Several firms, listed by the government as approved providers, failed to deliver test kits on time, or failed to return results.
Travellers were left quarantining at home unsure how to meet government testing requirements and in many cases unable to reach the testing companies online or by phone.
Some didn't receive test kits at all, despite having paid hundreds of pounds. A few received results for tests they hadn't taken.
Since 17 May the rules on international travel have been eased, and the vast majority of countries are on the government's "amber" list meaning travellers, including UK nationals, must pre-book a two-test package before they are allowed into the UK.
Now, Which? has found some providers are quoting headline prices for one test, when two are required. Others are marketing tests although they aren't ready to deliver them.
"Weeks on from some international travel being allowed to resume, it's very concerning to still be uncovering such serious problems with the government's testing system for travellers - problems that could have easily been ironed out well ahead of travel restarting, had proper regulatory oversight been ensured early on," said Rory Boland, travel editor at Which?
"As it stands, travellers risk being left at the mercy of rogue operators who, at best, attempt to profiteer off of those looking for testing services to allow them to travel, and at worst, risk leaving them out of pocket for services that don't even exist."
He said the government needed to sort out problems at testing firms before mass travel resumes, to avoid "chaos for travellers".
Confused pricing
In late May, Which? investigated the three cheapest offers, that appeared on the list of approved providers from the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC).
The prices offered by Biograd Diagnostics, Screen 4 and Book A Travel Test were between £60 and £98. However, when Which? investigated further it found the quoted prices were for a single test, not the compulsory two-test package.
The firms involved said the problem lay with how the DHSC recorded price information.
"A number of companies including ourselves were initially confused by the government listing forms," said a Book A Travel Test spokesperson.
"We have gone to great lengths to support travellers, however, we are not immune to costs and have had to navigate fluctuating charges from labs. We remain committed to doing all we can to deliver an excellent service to travellers during this difficult time.''
A Screen 4 spokesperson said the problem lay in "differences in terminology".
"We do not and have never tried to manipulate the listings and we have tried to provide a competitive and reliable service with clearly stated capacity of tests available," Screen 4 said.
Following Which's enquiries the headline listed prices of several firms rose.
However Which? said the underlying problem had not been corrected, as subsequently other firms were still quoting prices for a single test, making it appear that tests are available at half the true cost.
Which? also found that among the DHSC's accredited providers, several were not yet able to provide tests. Following Which?'s enquiries three firms were removed from the list.
The consumer group said taken together the problems suggested a lack of regulatory oversight and called for the government to explore options for reducing the cost of testing and to ensure providers were offering accurate information.
A DHSC spokesperson said: "The government regularly evaluates all providers' performance, including their delivery and test turnaround times.
"Providers who do not meet the minimum standards set by DHSC and reviewed by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS), or where our monitoring highlights concerns about their customer service performance, are removed from the gov.uk travel test list. Additionally, providers may not appear on the list where they are temporarily out of stock."

First Minister Mark Drakeford says that he does not want to make it easier for people to travel abroad amid criticism over the costs of Covid tests.
NHS PCR tests in Wales cost £88 for one test and £170 for two, but in England people can shop around and pay less than £50 per test.
Mr Drakeford said he had no plans to change the policy.
Travellers said the charges - which apply to anyone from Wales flying into the UK - are "unfair".
Under the policy Welsh residents must use specific NHS PCR tests on their return to Wales and there is a fine of £1,000 for using a private test provider instead.
Mr Drakeford told the Welsh Parliament members that ministers were advising people against international travel and said: "I don't intend to divert the activities of my officials into making it easier for people to do something that the Welsh government so clearly thinks is unadvisable."
Labour Caerphilly MS Hefin David asked Mr Drakeford whether the Welsh government would accept the cheaper tests during First Minister's Questions.
The first minister told him there are "good reasons" why the more expensive NHS test is preferable and guarantees variants from abroad can be "spotted quickly".
"I think those are compelling reasons as to why an NHS test is preferable, and we have no plans to change that position," he said.
Mr David said he supports the Welsh government's position, particularly in relation to amber list countries where people are obliged to take two PCR tests on their return to the UK.
"There is a clear public health risk from travel to amber countries - they are amber for a reason" he said.
"There is also the risk that while abroad, the UK government could move the country to red, which would necessitate quarantine in a managed hotel at your own cost. I therefore understand the first minister's desire to discourage travel to amber destinations."
Here are the latest rates of cases of Covid-19 in Devon and Cornwall.
The figures show the number of coronavirus cases per 100,000 people in the seven days up to and including 14 August compared with the week before, shown in brackets.
The breakdown of the figures by local authority area is:
For comparison, the figure for England is 308.
For a more detailed look at coronavirus where you live, use the BBC's postcode checker:
The coronavirus, which causes the respiratory disease known as Covid-19, was first confirmed in the UK at the end of January 2020.
Figures were updated on 18 August and come from the government's coronavirus dashboard.
Follow BBC News South West on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. Send your story ideas to spotlight@bbc.co.uk.
Two of the three neighbourhoods with the highest Covid rates in England are in the same Cornish town.
Newquay East has the highest rate at 1123.8 per 100,000 people in the week up to 13 August, with Newquay West in third position with 972.6.
The place between them is Yarborough, close to Grimsby and the popular seaside town of Cleethorpes in Lincolnshire.
The data from the government breaks down data into 6,800 areas in England.
Last weekend about 50,000 people attended the Boardmasters music festival near Newquay, but the latest figures do not cover this period.
Cornwall Council said virus cases remained high in Newquay "largely due to the high number of hospitality venues such as bars, pubs, clubs and restaurants, where people are now allowed to mix".
The council, along with Newquay Town Council has been giving out lateral flow tests "to help them fight back against Covid-19".
Many hospitality and retail businesses have been affected with staff shortages caused by positive tests, or by being told to isolate by the NHS app.
Zooming down to these smaller areas within England's local authorities, it's clear the level of infection is highest in many popular seaside towns, likely seeing increased visitor numbers over the summer.
It's difficult to measure how much of a direct impact tourists have on coronavirus cases, as positive tests are registered to a person's home address. But what we may be seeing in these areas is the knock-on effect on local residents.
Since the peak of the third wave, hospitality venues have been at the centre of some of the more significant spikes in cases - as seen in Lincoln a few weeks ago. It's unsurprising then that local officials are suggesting this may be behind the rise in Newquay.
What may be encouraging though is the outbreak seems to be fairly contained, and a relatively small rise in cases is being recorded across Cornwall as a whole - though still higher than average for England.
Jess Parkin, who owns Johnny's Tobacconist on Bank Street, a busy shopping street in Newquay, said he was grateful to his "brilliant staff for doing everything that can to get us through a very difficult period".
He said: "We were nearly forced to close over the busiest weekend of the year because three of four staff were off, having tested positive or awaiting PCR results.
"Fortunately a member of staff came back negative at 16:00 BST on Friday when I was all set to close at 17:00 and not open until Monday just to give us a rest. We were very lucky".
He added: "Every single business has had people off, had to struggle and shuffle staff around, to close, or close for a day a week. Everyone has been affected in one way or another.
"The town was 20% busier than normal anyway and then you add Boardmasters; it's a lot, a lot of people."
In a letter the joint health bosses of Cornwall said there were 27 patients with covid at the Royal Cornwall Hospital, up from 17 on 12 August.
The medical director of the hospital said the emergency department was the "busiest we have ever been".
Follow BBC Spotlight on Twitter and Facebook. Send your story ideas to spotlight@bbc.co.uk.
From 29 July fully vaccinated people coming to the Bailiwick of Guernsey will need to provide proof of a negative test before travelling.
On 1 July testing on arrival ended for fully vaccinated travellers from the Common Travel Area (CTA).
The move comes after community concerns and rising cases in close jurisdictions - including Jersey and the UK.
The director of Public Health said PCR tests and certain supervised lateral tests would be accepted.
Dr Nicola Brink said they had considered the accessibility and costs of the tests in their decision.
She said limiting the tests to PCR tests would mean people having to travel further to get a test and potentially putting themselves at a greater risk of infection.
Dr Brink gave the example of someone in London needing a 50-minute journey on public transport to access a PCR test or just a five-minute walk for a location that offers supervised lateral flow.
She said the supervised lateral flow tests in the UK could be found for £30-40.
More details are due to be released on Tuesday.
Fully vaccinated travellers from Jersey already have to provide a negative test result before travelling.
Others - anyone not fully vaccinated and those who start their journeys outside the CTA - aged over 12 are subject to a test and isolate system based on the level of Covid in the places they have travelled.
Deputy Peter Ferbrache, Chairman of the Civil Contingencies Authority, said: "Many of you are very uneasy about Covid cases coming into the bailiwick and that's put a strain on our relationship with you.
"We tried to address that and say we're doing everything we can, but we've got to be proportionate.
"Our vaccination levels now are very high and they are high enough now that the impact on cases is less, the risk to the community is less and we cannot justify preventing travel in the way we used to."
He said the key was striking the balance between "not letting Covid running riot" and "blanket restrictions".
Hundreds of people who have booked private Covid tests say the firms providing them are "scamming" them, delivering test kits and results late, or not at all.
Under lockdown rules people must take two tests when they return from abroad.
They are directed to a list of providers on the Department of Health's website.
But several of the firms on the list are the subject of furious complaints from customers.
Craig Dodd returned from France eight days ago but still hasn't received either of the two tests he paid £182 for.
He tried contacting the firm he booked them with, but has had no response.
"I tried phoning them. I was just permanently engaged. I've emailed 25 times I've heard nothing. No tests have arrived."
"I'm annoyed," he says. "Because it is a government-approved system you assume you are not going to get ripped off."
The firm he used, 001Doctor.UK is the subject of the highest volume of complaints online including in Facebook groups set up to discuss the problem, and has received more than 500 one-star reviews on Trustpilot.
Some customers said tests arrived late or not at all, or there had been problems with the registration process.
Until recently 001Doctor.UK was at the top of the government's list of approved providers and offered one of the cheapest services, although it has now been removed from one of the government's pages and the firm is no longer taking bookings for more tests by post, although still offers tests in person at its central London site.
Four other firms, all on the government's approved list, are also the subject of similar complaints, NowTest, Screen4, Latus Health and Nationwide Pathology.
001Doctor.UK responded to one complaint online with a "humble apology" saying it had received more orders than it had expected.
"We were not ready for it, as we did not envisage so many people travelling.
"As we were committed to saving money to [sic] our clients, we were the lowest price on the provider list as such many people booked tests through 001Doctor. This was at a level we could not have planned for."
The firm said less than 1% of its customers had been let down. It also said problems with Royal Mail and other courier services over the Easter weekend had led to delays "beyond its control"
The firm said it would try to respond to complaints "as fast as humanly possible".
Anna Olszynka, a self-employed beautician returning from Poland, is now on day 10 of her quarantine and still has not received either of the two tests she booked through 001Doctor.UK.
She is due to start work again on Monday, but it isn't clear whether she can legally end her quarantine.
Anna said that the Test and Trace agent who calls her every day to check she is quarantining was aware there were widespread issues around tests not being delivered.
Initially they advised her to call the firm, which she said was "pointless" as she can't get through on the phone.
"I spoke to a [test and trace] agent today," she says. "I was told I need to reorder the test from another provider."
But since ordering a new test automatically triggers 10 more days of quarantine, she is reluctant to do that.
"It's a shocking experience," she says.
The BBC has contacted all the test companies facing criticisms.
NowTest said it was "extremely sorry for any delays" and said there had been "overwhelming demand" for testing.
It said the delays were largely due to problems with Royal Mail deliveries over the Easter weekend.
"We brought forward orders to Wednesday and Thursday but somehow [Royal Mail] seem to have got completely overloaded," said chief executive Aaron Kravitz.
He said there had also been some problems sourcing enough test kits to meet demand.
NowTest has stopped taking new orders, is beefing up its customer service team, and is switching to an alternative courier.
The DHSC said all test providers had to meet "minimum required standards" and were reviewed by the accreditation service UKAS.
"We do not endorse or recommend any particular private test provider for quarantine test packages," a DHSC spokesperson said.
"We are carefully monitoring issues raised by the public about private test providers and are taking action where appropriate, including removing providers from the list."
People in England can start thinking about booking foreign holidays again this summer, Transport Secretary Grant Shapps has said.
But he said the cost of the Covid tests required needed to be driven down, amid criticism from the travel industry.
Mr Shapps has also given more detail on the traffic light system which will see countries graded on their risk.
Passengers will have to take the tests before leaving and on returning - even from low-risk "green" countries.
There will also be a watch list for countries most at risk of going from green to amber to provide greater assurance for those looking to travel abroad.
Announcing the findings of the Global Travel Taskforce set up by the government to examine how leisure travel could be reopened safely after lockdown, Mr Shapps said foreign holidays would resume on 17 May at the earliest.
He told the BBC: "This is the first time I'm able to come on and say I'm not advising against booking foreign holidays.
"Yes, you'll want to check what the situation is in two or three weeks' time when that list - the green, amber, red, is produced - you'll want to know that you've got good holiday insurance and flexible flights and the rest of it.
"But for the first time I think there is light at the end of the tunnel and we'll be able to restart international travel, including cruises by the way, in a safe and secure way, knowing about the vaccinations, everything we know about the disease this year, and of course that abundance of caution - having the tests in place."
Mr Shapps said the use of PCR tests - those needing to be sent to a lab - enabled scientists to detect potential variants of concern.
But he said he was "concerned" about the cost of the tests, adding that the government was committed to driving down the price of these by working with the private sector.
The transport secretary also said the government was looking at the possibility of people bringing pre-departure tests with them that they can use before boarding their return flight, pointing out that people are now able to order free lateral flow tests.
On Friday, the UK confirmed another 3,150 virus cases, and another 60 deaths of people who had tested positive in the past 28 days.
Mr Shapps said countries would be categorised based on level of infections and vaccinations, variants of concern and the quality of their genetic sequencing.
He said this list would be kept under constant review and that he was hopeful European countries would be upgraded as their vaccination rates improve.
Mr Shapps also said he was concerned about people who were separated from family members living overseas, saying it was "possibly even more pressing than the holiday issue".
He said families in the UK were "uniquely spread across the world", and the government wanted to make sure people were able to reunite.
The government has not yet said which countries will be green, amber or red - but said it would do so by early May.
Nearly 40 countries are currently on the UK government's red list of countries from which travel is banned, except for British and Irish nationals and those with residence rights in the UK.
The rules will be reviewed on 28 June to see whether any measures can be rolled back, the government said.
Further formal reviews will take place at "checkpoints" no later than 31 July and 1 October.
Shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds said the government had not outlined the traffic light system in detail and criticised the release of the plans while MPs are not sitting.
He told the BBC: "The government has spoken about factors like vaccination rates, infection rates, the position with variants and also about the level of genomic sequencing. But I've no idea what the levels of each of those are for the government to place countries into, whether it's the green category, amber or red."
The first ministers of Scotland and Wales have both already argued that 17 May will be too early for foreign holidays to resume.
Northern Ireland has not yet announced its plans, but its chief medical officer has said it would be "premature" to book a foreign summer trip.
In other developments:
At the moment, almost anyone seeking to travel to England must first take a coronavirus test before departure and then two tests when they arrive, bought through a private provider. Children under 11 are exempt.
Consumer group Which? estimated that each PCR test - which is just one of the tests needed - could cost about £120 per person.
However, the government said it would work with airlines, travel firms and the test providers to see whether prices can be reduced. That could involve cheaper tests, or the government providing the pre-departure tests.
The government's plans have been met with mixed reaction from the travel industry.
Here are five things you need to know about the coronavirus outbreak this Monday morning. We'll have another update for you at 18:00 BST.
Swab tests that can detect coronavirus within 90 minutes will be rolled out in care homes from next week, the government says. Thousands of DNA test machines offering results in a similar timescale will start to be used across NHS hospitals from September, with Health Secretary Matt Hancock saying they will help "break chains of transmission quickly".
Diners across the UK will be able to enjoy half-price meals at more than 72,000 venues from today, as the government's Eat Out to Help Out scheme begins. The offer - available from Mondays to Wednesdays throughout August - aims to boost lockdown-hit restaurants, cafes and pubs. However, critics say unhealthy food should have been excluded.
Scotland's national clinical director says there must be a "reverse gear" over easing lockdown after 13 Covid-19 cases were linked to one pub in Aberdeen. Prof Jason Leitch says he's "worried about indoor hospitality", adding: "I don't think we should overreact, but... we should pay attention to outbreaks in call centres, pharmacies and pubs." NHS Grampian says contact-tracing efforts are continuing.
With the summer holidays following on from months of lockdown-enforced home schooling, primary school teacher Jade Williams shares her tips for parents on how to keep kids entertained and away from screens.
Baveesha Ranchhod, 28, from Slough in Berkshire, taught herself henna tattooing after being furloughed from her job. She believes the repetitive nature of the patterns and the smell of the oils used in the making of natural henna can help with anxiety and depression.
Get a longer daily news briefing from the BBC in your inbox, each weekday morning, by signing up here.
...here's how you can take advantage of the Eat Out to Help Out offer.
You can find more information, advice and guides on our coronavirus page and get all the latest from our live page.
What questions do you have about coronavirus?
In some cases, your question will be published, displaying your name, age and location as you provide it, unless you state otherwise. Your contact details will never be published. Please ensure you have read our terms & conditions and privacy policy.
Use this form to ask your question:
