Foreign travel is about to get a bit easier, with new rules taking effect in England from Monday 19 July “ but it looks like the hassle of Covid testing will be with us for a while yet.
Consumers face a bewildering choice of firms offering Covid tests “ the UK government's website lists hundreds of providers, the vast majority of which are companies that most people wont have heard of. And there have been plenty of horror stories about people being left out of pocket or even missing flights after being let down by the firm that they paid.
Guardian Money has spent this week sifting through the options in an attempt to help you through the Covid testing maze, and we have identified some test providers that have delivered the goods for customers.
Before setting off from the UK, you may need to get proof of a negative Covid test in order to enter your destination country.
Most countries that require a Covid test will accept a PCR test, which will need to be done by a private provider.
Some countries will accept a rapid antigen (lateral flow) test, and these are quicker and cheaper.
Check the UK government website, and/or the government travel advice website of the country you are travelling to, for the latest details of entry requirements and tests required.
For example, on Thursday the site said anyone travelling to France who is fully vaccinated will need to provide evidence of a negative PCR test result taken within 72 hours of departure, or a non-NHS negative rapid antigen test taken in the previous 48 hours. Other countries that will currently accept a rapid antigen test include Italy, Germany and the US.
Some countries want to see a fit to fly or fit to travel certificate “ a document provided alongside a negative test as proof that it's safe for you to travel. Some providers charge extra for this, says consumer body Which?.
From 19 July, double-vaccinated holidaymakers from England travelling to amber-list countries will not have to quarantine on their return. Their re-entry requirements will be the same as those coming back from a green-list country.
Travellers will still have to take a pre-departure rapid antigen or PCR test before travelling back to England (NHS tests can't be used), and a PCR test on or before day two after their arrival. However, they will no longer need to take a day eight test.
This week, the rules in Scotland and Wales for those returning from amber-list countries were broadly brought into line with those for England, while Northern Ireland will follow on 26 July.
With PCR tests, the sample is sent to a lab for processing and analysis. Individual PCR tests typically cost from £50 to £250 “ many providers offer a range of packages at different prices.
Turnaround times vary from same-day results to 72-hour processing, with prices varying accordingly, says Covid Testing Network, a company that has launched a comparison site for PCR test providers.
Basically you have a choice between:
taking the test at home, where you are sent a swabbing kit and instructions, with some providers offering video calls with staff who can explain what you need to do;
or going to a clinic or walk-through/drive-through test site.
In terms of tests for leaving the UK, when getting your results in good time remains critical, Covid Testing Network recommends using a clinic. For arrival testing it recommends an at-home test on the basis that these are more convenient and usually cheaper.
When it comes to rapid antigen tests, these will often cost under £40, and it's often possible to get the results in a matter of minutes.
The obvious problem for consumers trying to choose a test provider is that this is a very new market that's trying to respond to a rapidly changing situation. That means prices fluctuate and that firms that have plenty of capacity today might run out of stock next week.
Plus, if it's a home test kit, you will be dependent on the reliability of whoever is transporting it. That all makes it very difficult to authoritatively say which are the best providers.
The government publishes two lists of providers. A general list just provides names, contact details and where they operate. There is also a more useful list of providers of day two and day eight tests “ at gov.uk/find-travel-test-provider “ which lets you search by testing method, location and price. But in both cases there are hundreds of firms listed, and the government has been quick to say that it doesn't endorse or recommend any specific provider and can't help people with any problems that they might have.
Rory Boland, travel editor at Which?, says that its research has found that several testing providers, including some listed on the government websites, are using misleading information about prices and not delivering results on time, leaving consumers at risk of financial loss as well as putting their travel plans in jeopardy.
However, the government says it closely monitors performance. All private providers of Covid tests must meet minimum required standards and are reviewed by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service (Ukas). If a provider fails to meet standards, they receive a five-day warning, and can be removed from the official lists if they don't improve.
The first thing holidaymakers should probably do is check to see what deals their airline, holiday company or airport are offering. Many travel firms offer discounted tests to customers and include links on their websites. For many this will be the cheapest way to get a test.
For example, British Airways has negotiated discounts with a range of firms including Breathe Assured, Chronomics, CityDoc, Collinson, Eurofins, ExpressTest, Halo, LetsGetChecked, Medicspot, Qured, Randox and Wren Healthcare. The BA site indicates that, of those, the Breathe Assured, Eurofins and Randox home-test kits are the cheapest at less than £50 for a PCR test.
The travel company Tui, meanwhile, says testing kits for its package holiday customers start from £20 a person. It has teamed up with Chronomics and three others: Klarity, Randox and Screen4. Some people will feel reassured that a household-name airline or travel agent has done some due diligence before signing a deal with a test provider.
For those befuddled by all the choice on offer, help is at hand from Covid Testing Network's comparison site for PCR test providers. Guardian Money put the site through its paces this week.
Covid Testing Network was started as an emergency volunteer network of laboratories to provide additional Covid-19 testing capacity for frontline healthcare workers. Its sister organisation is an independent non-profit medical research lab in Oxfordshire. Earlier this year, the company decided to launch a website to help people find the right PCR test. It can be found at covid19-testing.org.
The site caters for those looking for a test before they set off, and those returning from a trip. You can search for tests to take at home or at a clinicor airport, and make a selection based on price or customer satisfaction.
The site effectively mirrors the government lists. However, it labels some as trusted or verified providers. It receives a referral fee from these companies but says scores are based on third-party reviews.
Only those providers which have a high customer satisfaction [score] and which have capacity qualify to be listed as trusted, says Akshay Kumar, one of the co-founders. These scores are a combination of Trustpilot, Google and Facebook reviews, plus any other information the site is able to obtain. In that way it is˜independen™, and we need a minimum number of reviews before we publish a score; and providers can't influence the score we publish.
Providers with a verified stamp on their listing have confirmed their information is accurate and regularly update the site about changes to pricing or products.
We tried the site and first looked at tests for leaving the UK. When we opted for a home test, it came up with 17 trusted and verified providers. Wren Healthcare had the highest customer satisfaction score, 4.9 out of 5, but charged £169. The cheapest trusted provider was Biogroup Laboratory (a 3.9 score), which quoted £75.
Selecting a local clinic returned three trusted and verified firms, including ExpressTest in Stratford, east London, which charged £80 and had a score of 4.7, and Wren Healthcare, which charged £139.
When we chose Heathrow airport for our test, there were eight trusted and verified results. Wren Healthcare again had the highest satisfaction score (4.9) but cost £139. Cheapest was ExpressTest (£59).
Then we looked at day-two PCR tests. This assumed we were fully vaccinated and travelling back from an amber list country after 19 July. When we went for a home test and made a choice based on customer satisfaction, there were 22 trusted and verified results, with ExpressTest coming top score-wise and quoting £79. The cheapest of the trusted providers was Assured Screening (4.6) at £54.
When we chose on price, Dante Labs “ a verified provider “ came top at £49. But its customer satisfaction score was only 2.4, and Guardian Money has received some complaints about the firm. On Trustpilot this week, Dante Labs UK site was rated bad at 1.5 out of five. Dante Labs told Guardian Money that in recent weeks we have experienced issues with our customer contact centre and delivery partner, and that while a small number of customers have regrettably been adversely affected, the overwhelming majority have received a timely and cost-effective service. It said it had invested significantly and offered a refund to those affected.
Unfortunately, there doesn't seem to be an easy way to search the market for providers that offer the quickest results or any guarantees. Each firm has its own wording on this, and we couldn't find many that said results were guaranteed to be provided within a certain period. Wren Healthcare, with a number of test centres mainly in the south of England, was one firm offering guaranteed next day results.
With some firms, courier delivery is included in the price, and you may be able to upgrade your delivery options by paying more for a speedier service.
Theoretically, there's always the possibility of delays to postal or courier services, so if you are very worried about this, an in-clinic appointment may be the way to go.
"Wren Healthcare
4.9 out of 5 customer satisfaction score on Covid Testing Network, 4.9 excellent rating on Trustpilot
Mainly clinic-based “ the website lists nine locations, including Chiswick in west London and three in Kent. Home visits are also available. PCR tests for leaving and day two arrival cost £139, or £169 for a home visit. Its website says guaranteed next day results. Rapid antigen (lateral flow) tests cost £39, with results within 15-20 minutes."
"ExpressTest
4.7 out of 5 customer satisfaction score on Covid Testing Network, 4.6 excellent rating on Trustpilot
Offers in-person tests at more than 25 sites across the UK, from Southampton to Aberdeen, including several in London and at airports such as Heathrow, Birmingham and Edinburgh. Home test kits can also be booked for day two and day eight tests (for tests on or after 22 July). Prices for PCR tests vary “ they start from £59. It says it aims to deliver PCR test results by 10pm the next day, but says it can take up to 48 hours in exceptional circumstances (home tests have different timelines). Rapid antigen (lateral flow) tests cost from £35, with results in 30 minutes."
"Assured Screening
4.6 out of 5 customer satisfaction score on Covid Testing Network, 4.5 excellent rating on Trustpilot
Various test locations, including one at London King's Cross and sites in Birmingham, Darlington, Edinburgh, Leeds, Newcastle and Peterborough. Home tests are also available. Prices for PCR tests vary “ from £59 at a testing location and from £54 at home. Its site says: Results are normally processed within the guided turnaround time provided with each product."
"Medwyn Occupational Health
4.6 out of 5 customer satisfaction score on Covid Testing Network, 4.6 excellent rating on Trustpilot
Offers home tests, and also has a clinic in Dorking, Surrey. Various packages available: for pre-departure, home PCR tests are £99, with results 24 hours after lab receipt, while an in-clinic test offering a same-day result by midnight is £159. For day two tests, home test kits are £99. Rapid antigen (lateral flow) tests cost £39."
"T
he start of 2021 brought with it the end of the tampon tax. After years of campaigning, the government finally accepted the argument that sanitary products are an essential product, not a luxury, and should be treated as such for VAT purposes. Now, as with most food and children's clothing, they attract a zero rate of tax."
he start of 2021 brought with it the end of the tampon tax. After years of campaigning, the government finally accepted the argument that sanitary products are an essential product, not a luxury, and should be treated as such for VAT purposes. Now, as with most food and children's clothing, they attract a zero rate of tax.
The tampon tax campaign was the loudest relating to VAT rates in recent memory but it's certainly not the only one.
One that has been gathering steam of late relates to VAT on Covid tests for travellers. This week there were demands for ministers to cap the cost of PCR tests for international travel, and there is growing anger in some quarters about the way the government is earning millions of pounds from the regime because the tests carry VAT at 20%.
This week the Liberal Democrats called on the government to scrap the VAT on tests that was helping to keep prices high.
There are other campaigns running involving everything from bottles of sunscreen to solar panels.
So should we be getting on board with other calls to scrap the tax? We have rounded them up here so you can make up your own mind.
But first, a few basics. The standard rate of VAT (value added tax) is 20%, which applies to most goods and services. It is a tax paid by consumers but collected by businesses. VAT is a vital part of how the British government raises revenues, and any more changes would mean a decrease in government spending, an increase in borrowing or a rise in other taxes. In the 2019-20 tax year, VAT raised £133.8bn, equivalent to about £4,700 for each household.
The removal of VAT on sanitary towels and tampons was a victory for campaigners. But the legislation did not extend to period pants, which still carry 20% VAT. Period pants are reusable underwear meant to serve the same purpose as disposable sanitary products.
Modibodi, which sells period pants, is campaigning on the issue with the backing of the Women's Environmental Network (Wen).
Kristy Chong, the chief executive and founder of Modibodi, told Guardian Money: As the government stated in January, sanitary wear is not a luxury but essential, so we're frustrated that the government continues to exclude sustainable period pants from its revised tampon tax definition.
In order to progress its environmental goals and reduce period poverty in the UK, the government should be providing a level playing field for sustainable period pants and incentivise choosing sustainable products rather than creating financial barriers.
Period pants vary in cost but £15-£20 is a fairly average price, so VAT makes a noticeable impact.
Period pants petition
Currently many people travelling to and from the UK to other countries are required to take a paid-for PCR test before or after their journey, or both.
Prices for these tests vary hugely but the consumer body Which? this month estimated that for a return trip to some popular holiday destinations, an unvaccinated traveller could end up paying more than £200 a person for tests. These tests carry 20% VAT, meaning some families could face paying perhaps £100 to £200 in extra taxes to go on holiday.
However, a Guardian investigation this week found that some test providers were not, in fact, charging VAT.
While going on holiday is not essential, there is an argument that the government should be doing what it can to encourage testing and support the struggling travel and tourism industry.
The MP Layla Moran, the chair of the all-party parliamentary group on coronavirus, told Guardian Money: Most other European countries have succeeded in reducing the cost of PCR tests for consumers through capping prices or VAT exemptions. The government should consider similar measures to reduce the costs of PCR tests in the UK, which remain crucial to our efforts to track new variants and keep Covid cases under control.
The travel firm Tui is offering cheap tests for its customers but says: We're urging the government to help the industry and travellers by introducing cheaper tests for all those looking to get away this summer.
Responding to a written question from MP Sarah Olney, Jesse Norman, the financial secretary to the Treasury, said: Medical testing administered by registered health professionals is exempt from VAT. The government also continues to offer free Covid-19 testing for those with Covid-19 symptoms, and everyone in England, including those without symptoms, are able to take a free rapid coronavirus test twice a week.
PCR test petition
The NHS website's advice on sun exposure is to spend time in the shade, cover up with suitable clothing and use at least factor 30 sunscreen. And, yes, you can burn in the UK, even when it's cloudy.
Despite advice that we should all be using it, there is 20% VAT on sunscreen. This issue has caught the attention of MPs “ in 2019, Labour's Chris Bryant called for changes.
Bryant told Guardian Money: Having had a stage IIIB melanoma removed from the back of my head and undergone a year of targeted treatment, I know how frightening skin cancer can be. Sun damage is the main cause of skin cancer, so everything we can do to make good-quality sunscreen affordable to everyone will help save lives.
On 21 July this year, the Scottish National party MP Patricia Gibson issued a parliamentary petition urging the government to remove VAT on sunscreen.
Outside Westminster, Tesco is among those making a stand on the issue, and earlier this year said it was permanently reducing the price of its Soleil sun protection range by 20% to cover the cost of VAT, as it believed the safety of the nation's skin should not be treated as a luxury.
The market for suncare products was worth £279m in 2019, and although this includes after-sun and other related products, it means the sector brings the government tens of millions of pounds in VAT a year. That would be a large amount for the Treasury to have to make up every year.
But there could be savings made to the NHS if sunscreen use increases. One estimate has put the cost of skin cancer to the NHS at more than £180m a year.
In September 2020, in an answer to a question from the MP Rehman Chishti, the Treasury said that high-factor sunscreen was on the NHS prescription list for certain conditions and was provided VAT-free when dispensed by a pharmacist, adding: Expanding the scope of the current VAT relief would come at a considerable cost to the exchequer.
Sunscreen petition
Safety organisations including the Suzy Lamplugh Trust suggest people should consider carrying a personal alarm if they feel anxious while out and about. The cost of these alarms varies widely “ easily available models range from £3 to upwards of £20 “ and they include 20% VAT.
Caroline Nokes, the chair of the Commons women and equalities select committee, has called on the government to remove the tax. She says: From my perspective this is a very small step the Treasury could take to encourage the purchase of a device which might just deter an attacker. It is really clear to me that we need to have a concerted effort to reduce male violence perpetrated against women. The VAWG [Violence Against Women and Girls] strategy published recently has some excellent measures in it but we need HM Treasury to get behind it, and an easy way to do that could be a VAT reduction on these items.
One online petition refers to VAT on alarms as a fear tax, and says: We should not be charged for the choice to feel safe.
Personal safety alarms petition
The UK government has a 2050 net zero carbon target and last year announced a £3bn plan to upgrade the nation's buildings to make them greener and cheaper to run. But at the same time, ministers have been resisting calls to reduce VAT on green home improvements.
Libby Peake, the head of resource policy at the thinktank Green Alliance, says that VAT, as it stands, isn't driving the sorts of purchases that would lead to a low-carbon, nature-rich world. In fact, in far too many instances it's encouraging the opposite “ damaging products and activities.
She points out that while there is 20% VAT on many solar panel installations, there is only 5% VAT on home gas supplies.
And while you pay the full VAT rate to retrofit your home “ to keep it in good repair and improve its energy efficiency “ new-build benefits from no VAT whatsoever while using a lot of resources and emitting a lot of carbon, she says.
Simple adjustments to VAT to end these perversities would send a strong signal to the public that the economy is geared towards creating a greener, healthier society.
Low and zero carbon products petition
It is the law for children to use a car seat when they travel, yet parents and carers pay 5% VAT when they buy them. This is a reduced rate, from the standard 20%, but not as low as the 0% rate on other products, including cycle helmets, which are not mandatory by law but are exempt from VAT if they meet regulations for personal protective equipment.
Halfords, which sells children's car seats, has previously campaigned on the issue. A Halfords spokesperson says: Children's car seats are a necessity for millions of families in the UK. Parents and grandparents should not be charged extra for protecting children, which is why we would like to see VAT on car seats either reduced or ended.
Laurence Guinness, the chief executive of poverty charity the Childhood Trust, told Guardian Money: We urge the government to scrap the current 5% VAT imposed on child safety seats. This is a damaging tax on safety that disproportionately impacts families on the lowest incomes with multiple children and may well be contributing towards harm to children by those who, through no fault of their own, just can't afford the best protection for their young children.
In September 2020, in a response to a question from the MP Bridget Phillipson, the Treasury said: Families already benefit from a reduced rate of VAT of 5% on children's carrycots with restraint straps. The government has no plans to change this VAT treatment at this time.
Probably the most arguable product being campaigned on is vapes, which attract 20% VAT. They are a product that is not an essential and, we are advised, is bad for our health, although for smokers they could be a good way to quit.
In February this year, Prof John Newton, the director of health improvement at Public Health England, said smoking was still the leading preventable cause of premature death and disease, killing almost 75,000 people in England in 2019, and the evidence shows that vaping is one of the most effective quit aids available, helping around 50,000 smokers quit a year.
John Dunne, the director general of the UK Vaping Industry Association, believes a lower rate of VAT on vapes could help more people give up smoking. He says: We're not looking to remove the VAT on vaping products “ we're looking to be in line with other nicotine replacement therapies such as gum and patches, which are VAT-rated at 5%.
Issues around VAT can get pretty heated, as anyone who remembers the pasty tax affair of 2012 will attest. That involved proposals to impose VAT on hot takeaway food such as Cornish pasties.
The stated reason for the introduction of 20% VAT was to end anomalies, yet within days it had triggered an almighty row. The high street bakery chain Greggs and the National Association of Master Bakers (now called the Craft Bakers Association) brought pasty makers to Downing Street in force to deliver a petition from half a million people opposing the plans.
The outcry eventually prompted a government U-turn, with the then chancellor, George Osborne, saying he would not charge VAT on food that was designed to cool down, such as sausage rolls and pasties.
In that same year there was also a government climbdown over the introduction of a 20% VAT charge on static caravans used for holiday purposes. With opponents lining up to criticise the move, the government eventually cut the tax charge on static caravan sales to 5%.
Spool back 30 years and there was a big bust-up over Jaffa Cakes and VAT. In 1991, McVitie's went to court to defend the Jaffa Cake's non-biscuit status. The company successfully argued that the product was a cake, not a biscuit, and so was not liable for VAT.
Cakes are considered to be a staple food and therefore zero-rated for VAT. Biscuits are also zero-rated unless they are wholly or partly covered in chocolate (or some product similar in taste and appearance), to quote the official rules.
A tribunal determined that certain characteristics of the Jaffa Cake were cake-like, including the ingredients and texture, but it was also the size and shape of a biscuit, packaged and sold alongside biscuits, and presented to be eaten with the fingers and not, as might be expected of a cake, eaten with a fork. The product was nevertheless determined to be a cake.
However, that has not stopped the is it a cake or is it a biscuit debate from continuing to rage online every now and again.
Travellers requiring Covid-19 tests have been misled by firms that appear on the government's official list of test providers, according to a consumer group.
Prices were quoted for tests that did not meet the requirements for travel, and some firms were unable to provide the tests they advertised, Which? said.
The problems will compound the confusion and cost surrounding foreign travel since the launch of the traffic light system in May, under which people returning from a country on the amber list are required to quarantine and pre-book two PCR tests to be taken on days two and eight after arrival.
Which? said a number of the tests from firms listed among the 10 cheapest providers turned out to be much more expensive than initially suggested, and others were unobtainable.
The three cheapest providers advertised on the government list for entry into the UK offered tests at between £60 and £80, but it transpired that the prices only covered a single DIY test and not the two PCR tests required to return from an amber list country.
Which? said other listed providers did not offer testing services, and that its investigation had highlighted serious flaws in the government's system. It called on the government to explore ways to reduce the cost of testing and to urgently ensure all providers are accredited, with proper oversight of the listings and accurate information.
The problems persist six months after widespread complaints about the availability and efficacy of test providers when the UK launched its test to release policy, which allowed returning travellers to end quarantine on day five with a negative test.
Rory Boland, Which?'s travel editor, said it was concerning to still see problems with the system. As it stands, travellers risk being left at the mercy of rogue operators who at best attempt to profiteer off of those looking for testing services to allow them to travel, and at worst risk leaving them out of pocket for services that don't even exist, he said. The government needs to urgently sort out these problems before mass travel resumes, or it will create chaos for travellers who have to rely on the system.
A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: We carefully monitor issues raised by the public and raise complaints with private test providers directly. The government regularly evaluates all providers' performance, including their delivery and test turnaround times. Providers that did not meet the minimum standards were removed from the list, they added.
Air passengers to the UK have spent at least £500m on PCR Covid-19 tests from private companies since mid-May, a Guardian analysis has found, only for the NHS to be saddled with extra costs when firms fail to deliver them.
Concern is mounting that the system for testing travellers is on the brink of collapse, with Heathrow airport calling on Wednesday for the government to allow people to use cheaper lateral flow tests instead.
Travellers have reported having to call the NHS testing hotline on 119 for free taxpayer-funded kits after PCR tests they had paid for did not arrive.
Sandra Parrish, a nurse, said she had been told by NHS Test & Trace to call 119 when tests she ordered from Luxembourg-based Eurofins did not arrive on time.
Her day 8 test, ordered from the same company, was also delayed. Sandra said she had asked for a refund from Eurofins after spending £80 with them, but has yet to receive one.
When the test didn't turn up, [Test & Trace said] dial 119 and it was sent from the NHS. All that resource used and we had already paid all that money.
In the end, she paid for a day 5 test in order to go back to work sooner, spending £180 in total. She said: I got a Covid bonus for working for the NHS “ after tax it was less than that.
The Guardian has approached Eurofins for comment. An email sent by the company to Parrish blamed logistical problems for delayed delivery.
Bottlenecks in the system have built up amid a significant increase in the number of flights being taken since foreign travel for leisure purposes became legal in Britain on 17 May.
Heathrow said its terminals hosted 1.5 million passengers in July, a rise of nearly 58% on June, after restrictions on travel were further loosened for those who have had two vaccine jabs.
If the increase seen at Heathrow is matched at other major airports, which are yet to report figures, approximately 4.2 million passengers would have flown during the month.
Coronavirus rules governing the busiest air travel routes mean most will have had to take at least one PCR test. Test kits cost an average of £75 each, indicating that air passengers spent at least £315m on them during July.
One aviation analyst said the Guardian's estimate was credible and provided a parallel figure of £186m for the period between mid-May and the end of June, based on flight data and travel restrictions imposed by different countries.
Travellers spent at least £500m combined on tests between mid-May and the end of July, the analysis suggests. However, the true figure is likely to be significantly higher, given the fact that many passengers will have had to take multiple PCR tests if they were not fully vaccinated or if they were fully vaccinated but returned home from an amber list country before the quarantine exemption was brought in for this group on 19 July. The passenger increase at airports may have also been higher at airports other than Heathrow, which caters more to long-haul passengers.
Government must now capitalise on the vaccine dividend and seize the opportunity to replace expensive PCR tests with more affordable lateral flow tests, said Heathrow's chief operating officer Emma Gilthorpe.
This will ensure travel remains attainable for hardworking Brits, desperate for well-earned getaways and keen to reunite with loved ones before the summer travel window closes.
The consumer group Which? said it had warned the government several times to expect the entirely foreseeable chaos engulfing the travel testing system.
Rory Boland, Which? travel editor, said: These are government mandated tests, so it's essential the government takes responsibility for ensuring travel is affordable for all UK consumers The Competition and Markets Authority should move quickly to ensure that action is taken against any rogue operators in the testing market, such as those charging excessive or misleading fees for tests.
The government must also introduce robust accreditation for all test providers listed on its website, to prevent travellers being ripped off when trying to buy something as essential as a test.
"T
his summer, holidays could be a testing time if you are travelling overseas “ many countries including the UK are demanding proof that you do not have Covid-19 before you arrive, which could mean taking tests on the way and the way back."
his summer, holidays could be a testing time if you are travelling overseas “ many countries including the UK are demanding proof that you do not have Covid-19 before you arrive, which could mean taking tests on the way and the way back.
The good news is that prices for the tests are falling. The bad news is that trying to get your head around the complex rules and multitude of options is no easy task.
There are two things to think about: the test(s) you may be required to take before you travel from the UK; and the test(s) you must take before you return and after you get back.
Before you start your holiday you need to check whether your destination requires you to provide evidence that you are Covid-free.
The government says that from 17 May, people in England who have had both jabs will be able to demonstrate their vaccination status via the NHS app when travelling abroad. But with not many countries currently accepting proof of vaccination, for the time being most people will still need to follow other rules, such as getting a negative pre-departure test. You will need to monitor the UK government's travel advice, and that of your destination country.
This is a fast-moving situation. For example, at the time of writing, Spain required all passengers arriving from the UK to present a negative PCR test carried out no more than 72 hours prior to arrival. There were widespread media reports that Spain will ditch this requirement for Britons from 20 May “ but it is currently not on the green list, so the return trip is a different matter.
The new traffic-light system outlined by the UK government, with destinations placed on green, amber and red lists, relates to the requirements for people arriving in Great Britain from abroad.
Anyone arriving from a green list country will need to take two tests “ whether they are a resident or a visitor. First, you must have a negative pre-departure Covid test “ this must be done in the 72 hours before your flight back. Children under 11 do not need to take a test.
If you test positive, you may have to move into a quarantine hotel or extend your stay at your accommodation, depending on the other country's rules. If you test negative you can travel. Then you will have to take a PCR test on or before day two after your arrival in the UK.
The PCR tests required by most countries are not the same as the free quick-result lateral flow tests you can order online or pick up from pharmacies. With PCR tests, the sample is sent to a lab for processing and analysis. It takes longer to get the results and tests can be pricey “ £120 each or more “ but holiday companies, airlines and airports are starting to offer much cheaper deals.
The cheapest way to get a test is if your airline or holiday provider offers a discount to its customers, says the consumer body Which?. Many airlines and holiday companies include links to Covid test providers on their websites.
Tui offers two kits that include outbound PCR tests if required by your destination country, costing £60 a person for countries on the UK's green list and £90 for those on the amber list. The £60 kit contains one PCR test for the journey to your destination, with courier costs included, one pre-departure lateral flow test for your journey back, and one PCR test for day two after you return home.
For those travelling to green list countries that don't insist on a negative result before letting you in, Tui's kits start at £20 a person for a pre-departure lateral flow test for your journey back from your destination, and a PCR test on day two after their return. Needless to say, these kits are only available to the firm's package holiday customers.
Ryanair and easyJet are offering reduced-price PCR tests “ £60 for UK-based customers instead of £120, for example “ as a result of linkups with the testing provider Randox.
The British Airways website highlights a range of options, including five PCR home test firms where discounts are available.
BA also offers deals on services at testing centres and airports. It has negotiated discounts with CityDoc and ExpressTest.
Which? says testing centres at airports are often cheaper than those on the high street, so check what deals the airport you are using is offering. For example, there are several testing providers based at Gatwick, including ExpressTest drive-through and walk-in facilities offering PCR tests for people travelling from the UK for £60. They aim to give the results by 10pm the next day but say it could take up to 48 hours.
However, you can't just do the test and hop on your flight a couple of hours later, so for many people this won't be a convenient option.
In terms of big retailers, Boots has launched an at-home PCR test kit costing £65 that is available online and in some stores, and which promises results within 24-48 hours of the lab receiving the sample. It also offers an in-store PCR testing service for £99.
With the window for having a test and travelling very tight, you may prefer to choose a service that does not involve posting your te so you know it should get to the lab in plenty of time.
If you are stuck overseas because of a positive test, your insurer may pay out to cover any extra accommodation bills. Check the policy details before you book.
Covid testing for passengers arriving in the UK could begin within weeks, according to Heathrow chief executive John Holland-Kaye. The airport has been told by Boris Johnson that the government is aiming to begin trials by mid-October, with the potential for a New York-London route opening by the end of November.
The model is expected to use the two-test approach for those arriving from high-risk countries. In a system that would effectively cut the current 14-day quarantine at least in half, passengers will take one test before departure, and another five or seven days after arrival.
Speaking during a Travel Weekly webcast, Holland-Kaye said that following successful trials, the resumption of flights between New York and London, one of the world's busiest routes, would be entirely feasible by Thanksgiving (26 November). This would rely on the UK and US governments agreeing to a pilot project, which could then be rolled out to other countries with the aim of creating an international standard.
We've heard from the prime minister that he hopes to go to a trial in the second half of October, Holland-Kaye said. It would take a couple of weeks to put into practice, but if we get good results, there is no reason we shouldn't be able to extend it. It's possible that in the first or second quarter of next year, we'll see rapid point-of-care tests becoming more normal.
The tests would be done privately, costing passengers around £150. The test facility, which will be managed by aviation services firm Swissport and the Collinson Group, which runs airport lounges, is expected to be integrated with the government's test-and-trace system.
Facilities have been ready to go at Heathrow terminals 2 and 5 for some time, along with temperature scanning equipment. The airport is now waiting for the green light to roll out the pilot, with a decision possible within days, said Holland-Kaye.
Unlike PCR testing “ the gold-standard test used by the UK government, where samples have to be sent off to a lab “ rapid testing technology can provide results within as little as 20 seconds, and an hour at most.
Currently the bottleneck is the availability of the government's preferred PCR testing labs; rapid point-of-care tests solve that problem, said Holland- Kaye. I have experienced [tech company] iAbra's rapid test myself, and it is quicker, cheaper and potentially more accurate than the PCR test.
iAbra is about to start clinical trials aimed at making its testing model certifiable for medical use. The British tech startup said that the procedure does not need to be administered by healthcare professionals and is repeatable. Each screening device, it said, can carry out hundreds of tests a day at an eventual cost per test equivalent to that of a paperback book.
Although the government has yet to make any official announcements on airport testing, transport secretary Grant Shapps has signalled several times that he favours a double-test approach.
Paul Charles, of travel consultancy the PC Agency, is among the many travel sector bosses who have been calling for airport testing since early May. Testing travellers, whether on departure or on arrival, is one of the most important steps the government could take, he said. It would boost confidence in travelling and offer substantial reassurance, knowing that those around you at the airport or on a plane are Covid-free.
Recent research from Skyscanner found that 84% of travellers would be more likely to travel if testing was in place.
Next week, Sally Neuman is going on holiday. But instead of jetting off to a Mediterranean beach or heading to an idyllic cottage in the UK countryside, she is going to stay with her daughter in London for four days.
Neuman, an NHS worker on the Isle of Wight, is planning to take her young granddaughter to a few museums. But mostly, after 16 months of working flat out during the pandemic, she is simply looking forward to a change of scene.
I haven't been away since 2018, and I'd love to get a real break, to relax by a pool. But a proper holiday is out of the question, she said.
Prices in the UK have jumped, and the costs and risks of going abroad are too high. I don't know of any frontline colleagues who are getting on a plane because no one can afford to isolate on the way back if the rules change.
Neuman is one of thousands of people who are forgoing a holiday this summer because of the cost, hassle and potential risks. Ministers have urged Britons to holiday at home but big rises in the cost of accommodation and limited availability have made that impossible for many.
Inevitably, it is the people who have been most stretched during the pandemic, poorly paid frontline workers, who are in greatest need of a break and least able to afford one.
This is borne out in data from the latest Opinium poll for the Observer. It found that among people in higher social and economic groups, 27% said they had taken a holiday in the UK and 8% said they had taken a holiday abroad this year. Among poorer social groups, 17% said they had taken a holiday in the UK, with 5% saying they had taken a holiday abroad.
A fifth (20%) of the wealthier group said they had booked a UK holiday for later in the year; that figure was 13% for the poorer group. Almost two-thirds (64%) of the poorer group said they had not taken and had not booked a holiday this year; that figure was 52% for the wealthier group.
Only the better off can afford to take a holiday this year, said Rory Boland, travel editor of the consumer magazine Which? It's simply out of range for many people.
For lots of people who have worked incredibly hard during the pandemic, probably top of their wishlist would be a week on a beach, either here or abroad.
Some say holidays are ˜non-essential, but so is going to the pub, or a football match or the theatre. Many people really deserve a break.
For those heading abroad, the cost of Covid tests can work out higher than the cost of flights. Fully vaccinated travellers to Spain need to pay £91 for each person for two tests on return to the UK, according to Which? Unvaccinated travellers must spend £219 for four tests.
Even at the cheaper end, that can add up to nearly £200 for a couple. That is a meaningful extra cost for lots of people that simply prices them out of a holiday, said Boland.
The cost of holidaying in the UK has risen significantly. Holiday-let data analysts AirDNA recently calculated that the cost of accommodation this year compared with 2019 had increased by 30% in Cornwall, 40% in Skegness and 27% in Pembrokeshire. Car rental prices have doubled in some cases, and train trips within the UK can be two or three times the cost of a cheap flight abroad.
Until little more than 100 years ago, holidays were the preserve of the affluent. Going abroad became commonplace only in the 50s and 60s with the emergence of the package holiday. Now, according to Michael Hitchcock, professor of cultural policy and tourism at Goldsmiths, University of London, holidays are seen as a measure of a country's economic and social development “ it's associated with notions of prosperity and wellbeing.
The idea that we all have a right to a holiday is very deeply embedded in British culture. It's one of the things people talk about to friends and colleagues. Children's first memories are often about a family holiday. For young people, to go on holiday with your mates for the first time is a rite of passage.
The holiday accommodation sector was understandably keen to recoup some of the losses incurred as a result of restrictions on travel, domestically and internationally, during the pandemic, said Marina Novelli, professor of tourism and international development at the University of Brighton's business school.
But what is worrying is if what is happening today is here to stay. When mainland Europe moved its currencies to the euro, prices increased dramatically “ and didn't go back down. If today's increased prices stay, there won't be the recovery we all hope for.
For Neuman, living in one of the UK's top holiday destinations does not lessen the need to get away. It's absolutely heaving here “ the beaches are bumper-to-bumper, there's nowhere to park and prices have been jacked up.
Everyone needs a break, and the only time you can get one is when you get away from home. To be honest, I'm not even thinking about next year “ maybe the year after?
