The cost of travel tests from NHS Test and Trace for people who arrive from abroad into the UK is to be cut, the Health Department has said.
It is to go down from £88 to £68 for UK travellers who have come from green list countries, or those who have arrived from amber list countries and have been fully vaccinated.
The cost for people arriving from amber list countries who are not fully vaccinated is to go down from £170 to £136 for two tests.
Health Secretary Sajid Javid also said there will be a 10-day internal review starting this weekend of the pricing and standards of service from providers of the tests that are to be taken by those who have returned to England on days two and eight of their arrival from abroad.
Mr Javid said that the cost of PCR testing can be a barrier to people who were looking forward to taking a summer holiday.
Consumers and families need to be protected from exploitative practices, according to Mr Javid, who said he wants to ensure that high quality tests are available at a reasonable price.
NHS Test and Trace advertises these tests alongside private companies testing packages and they are available to buy to fulfil the UK Government's testing requirements for international travel.
Mr Javid said he has ordered his department to urgently review the list of private providers on gov.uk to ensure pricing is clearer and transparent.
He added: Any provider found to be misleading the public will be kicked off.
Too many providers are acting like cowboys and that needs to stop. The public should be allowed to enjoy their summer holidays without having to face excessive costs or anxiety.
Airport Operators Association chief executive Karen Dee, who described the cost of testing for travel as sky-high, said: However, this small reduction is little more than tinkering and does not go anywhere near far enough to meaningfully cut the costs of travel.
She called on the Government to get a grip on testing and replace costly PCR tests with more affordable rapid tests for low-risk countries and bring international travel in line with the rest of the economy.
The price reduction comes as the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) said it is looking at whether there are any immediate actions the Government can take amid concerns about the high cost of PCR tests for travel abroad.
The competition watchdog had previously confirmed it will look into issues around testing, following a request from Mr Javid, but said it will give its recommendations within the next month.
Now the watchdog has said it is also looking at steps that could be considered in the interim to address what it described as a particularly pressing issue.
The CMA said it is looking at three areas “whether individual PCR providers may be breaching their obligations under consumer law and should be subject to enforcement action; whether there are structural problems in the market for PCR tests, affecting price or reliability; and whether there are any immediate actions that the Government can take in the meantime.
Some providers offering PCR tests which meet minimum standards have been charging £200 or more.
This week, Conservative MP Henry Smith, who is the chairman of the Future of Aviation All-Party Parliamentary Group, said private Covid-19 tests should be capped at £40.
He said this would allow more people to travel abroad, putting aviation back on a sustainable path to recovery.
George Lusty, the CM's senior director for consumer protection, said: It is essential that people paying for PCR tests are treated fairly, get what they pay for and that their rights are respected when things go wrong.
We will not hesitate to take enforcement action if we find evidence that PCR providers are breaching consumer law.
We are also working closely with the Department of Health and Social Care to get the data we need to identify the cause of any wider problems in the PCR testing market, and to ground our advice on what action may be needed.
This is a particularly pressing issue just now for families hoping to enjoy a well-earned holiday after such a difficult year, and for those reuniting with friends and relatives overseas.
That is why we are also providing ongoing support to DHSC, including on steps that could be considered in the interim, before the rest of our work on the PCR testing market is concluded.
Paul Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy The PC Agency, said ministers have been asleep at the wheel on this.
He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: This is an industry that has grown up, that's worth some £700 million. It's grown up in the last six months at great speed, but there's been a lack of oversight or proper regulation.
He said the process of organising, paying for and carrying out the tests has too many layers of complexity.
He added: It's putting off consumers. Government is determined to dampen demand, I don't think there's any doubt about that.
But of course, because it's putting off people, that's not helping the travel sector recover and we're likely to see more failures and job losses because ministers have not done enough, along with the regulators, to save the August peak period.
A new cheaper and quicker Covid test could be rolled out at airports in as little as three months, researchers have said.
The development, from scientists at the University of Birmingham, comes amid ongoing controversy about the expense of tests required for travellers coming to the UK.
PCR tests typically cost around £65 but some private clinics are charging around £200.
Health Secretary Sajid Javid has acknowledged that the cost of PCR testing can be "a barrier" to people wanting to travel and said consumers and families need to be protected from "exploitative practices".
An internal review of the pricing and standards of service from test providers was announced at the weekend.
Listen to our coronavirus podcast - What do the latest travel changes mean for your summer holiday? Your questions answered
On Friday, the Department of Health said the cost of NHS Test and Trace tests for international arrivals would be reduced “going down from £88 to £68 for travellers coming from green list countries, or those arriving from amber list countries who are fully vaccinated.
The cost for people arriving from amber list countries who are not double jabbed was reduced from £170 to £136 for two tests.
Researchers at the University of Birmingham said they have developed a test that is as sensitive as a PCR test but can give results in just a few minutes without the need for a laboratory.
One of those behind the research said it would be "ideally suited" to airports and could be rolled out in three to six months with commercial backing.
Their test, using the exponential amplification reaction (EXPAR) method, can detect results in less than 10 minutes, even for low levels of virus, they said.
Tim Dafforn, professor of biotechnology at the university's School of Biosciences, said: "An ideal test would be one that is both sufficiently sensitive and speedy “ our test, called RTF-EXPAR, achieves this goal."
He added: "The simplicity and speed of this new test means that it is ideally suited to environments where a rapid answer is required close to need, like airports and entertainment venues."
Mr Dafforn added: "The test works with existing instrumentation, meaning that it could conceivably be deployed in these areas in three to six months with some commercial backing."
At low levels of virus, results were detected in around 8.75 minutes, while at high concentrations the detection time was just 3.08 minutes, the researchers said.
Professor Andrew Beggs, from the Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences at the university, who also worked on the study published in PNAS, said their test should be "much cheaper" than laboratory-based tests and added that they would like to see it rolled out as soon as possible.
He said: "The analysis showed RTF-EXPAR's sensitivity is equivalent to quantitative PCR testing, with a positive predictive value of 89%, and a negative predictive value of 93%.
The full results will be published in the near future, he said.
Prof Beggs added: "The test is suitable for near-patient testing, so should be much cheaper than laboratory-based tests".
A coronavirus testing firm has halved the price of its PCR tests for travellers returning to the UK from abroad.
Randox, which charged around £120 for the Covid tests, announced it would cut prices to £60 for passengers flying with partner airlines.
The partner airlines have not yet been confirmed, but it is understood they will be major airlines and the discount will be available before summer.
The plans come after the government announced last week that travellers arriving in the UK from any country must take PCR tests.
The travel industry expressed concerns that the testing requirements would make foreign holidays unaffordable for many people. Many firms wanted people arriving from low-risk countries to be able to take rapid lateral flow tests, which are cheaper and gives results within 30 minutes.
Will I be able to go on a foreign holiday and how will the traffic light system work?
Covid holidays: What are the differences between Lateral Flow and PCR coronavirus tests? And how do they work?
Meanwhile, results from PCR tests can take several days as swabs need to be processed in a laboratory.
Randox managing director Dr Peter FitzGerald said: In recognition of the needs of both the travel industry and the British public at this unprecedented time, Randox will reduce the all-inclusive cost of PCR testing for those in the UK undertaking international travel to £60 per test.
We can see the pressures faced by both the travel industry and the general public and are committed to effective and economical testing to support holidaymakers and those undertaking international travel.
Listen to our coronavirus podcast:
Paul Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy the PC Agency, said reducing the price of testing is the magic wand to recovery in the travel sector.
He went on: More providers need to encourage people back to travel with lower per person costs so as to stimulate the market.
Mr Charles also urged the Government to abolish VAT on tests so that the sector can benefit from every measure possible.
He added: Border policies have crushed the travel sector and it now needs full support to get back on its feet.
As of April 12, holidaymakers in England are allowed to book a domestic trip, but only accommodation that does not involve indoor facilities can operate. There are similar rules in place in Wales.
Under Boris Johnson's original roadmap out of lockdown for England, the earliest date holidays abroad can resume is May 17.
PM says summer holidays to be 'affordable as possible' and could resume in May
Government-listed Covid-19 test supplier criticised for shambolic appalling service
Jet2 extends suspension of flights and holidays until June 23 over 'lack of clarity'
Tui, the UK's largest holiday company, is to offer coronavirus tests from just £20 to green list countries in a bid to make travel a possibility.
The holiday firm said its cheapest package will consist of a lateral flow test and PCR test - the minimum requirement for people returning to or visiting England from green list destinations under new Government rules.
A £50 package contains an additional PCR test, which will be needed for those travelling from a country on the amber list.
PCR tests alone typically cost £120 each, although several travel companies offer them for £60.
Tui said it is subsidising the cost of testing to help customers travel again this summer.
There have been fears that testing requirements would add hundreds of pounds to the overall cost of a summer holidays and put foreign trips out of financial reach for many.
The 'traffic light' list, based on an assessment of coronavirus risks, are expected to be published by the Department for Transport on Friday.
Countries will be divided up into green, amber and red, with different rules for each category.
Green: There is no need to self-isolate. Take a pre-departure test and a PCR test on day two of your arrival in the UK.
Amber: Self-isolate for 10 days, unless you receive a negative result from a test taken at least five days after arrival. Take a pre-departure test, and PCR tests on day two and day eight of your arrival in the UK.
Red: Spend 10 days in a quarantine hotel. Take a pre-departure test, and PCR tests on day two and day eight of your arrival in the UK.
Travellers should not need PCR Covid tests if they are vaccinated or coming from low-risk countries, easyJet boss says
Public told 'wait a few days' before booking foreign trips
International leisure travel is expected to be permitted to resume for people in England from May 17 according to Boris Johnson's roadmap.
No dates have been set by the UK's devolved administrations.
Tui has partnered with Norwich-based testing firm Chronomics to offer the packages.
Andrew Flintham, Tui's managing director for the UK and Ireland, said: Our research has shown that customers are looking forward to their much-needed holiday overseas, but affordable and easy testing solutions was imperative to make this a reality.
The four new exclusive testing packages have been developed with our customers in mind; they're offered at greatly reduced prices, include certification to travel and will be a simple process from start to finish.
Listen to our coronavirus podcast:
Rory Boland, editor of magazine Which? Travel, said: Tui launching an affordable testing package for holidays to green list countries is great news  "but only for Tui customers.
Other larger holiday companies that can afford to subsidise test costs may follow suit, but medium and small travel firms may struggle to compete, and holidaymakers could face reduced choice as a result.
People should not have to shop around for mandatory tests if they want to travel, or have their hand forced as to who they book with based on limited provision of cheap tests.
The Government must work to reduce the cost of testing across the board, rather than have consumers rely on a system that is currently fragmented and flawed.
"Private Covid-19 tests should be capped at £40, senior MPs have urged the government, amid a growing Conservative revolt against the charges.
Henry Smith, the chairman of the Future of Aviation All-Party Parliamentary Group, has led calls for the cap for PCR tests, which still average £75, making foreign holidays unaffordable for many."
The senior Tory wants PCR tests to be scrapped for holidaymakers coming back from "low-risk" countries, as under current rules even double vaccinated travellers face mandatory tests on return from green and amber destinations.
It comes amid complaints of "rip-off" services failing to provide results in time - even with some holidaymakers being forced to fork out hundreds for the checks.
A cap would enable more people to travel abroad, putting aviation back on a sustainable path to recovery, Mr Smith, the MP for Crawley argued.
Writing in the Telegraph, Mr Smith said: Every single traveller, including fully vaccinated arrivals from green countries with vanishingly low rates of Covid, are being treated as potential vectors of some dangerous new variant, and must pay through the nose for a battery of tests that on average still cost around £100 per traveller.
How many businesses, or theatres, or restaurants, could survive if the government slapped a £100 tax on each transaction. Very few," he added.
"Yet that is what we are asking the travel sector to endure, where the costs of the mandated tests are sometimes several times the cost of the actual plane ticket.
The real risk is that air travel becomes the preserve only of the wealthy, for whom adding £400 to the cost of a family week in Spain is no big deal.
He added: Government needs to build on recent progress with vaccination exemptions from quarantine by eliminating testing requirements from low-risk countries, and by capping the price of PCR tests to something like £40 “ if and where they are still needed."
Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said he is "worried about the length of time it takes for tests and the costs of tests".
"A lot of people are returning feeling they're not entering an orderly system and frankly I think they feel they're being ripped off," he told ITV News earlier this week.
His views were echoed by Huw Merriman, chairman of the transport select committee, who published a letter to Health Secretary Sajid Javid in which he asked the government to consider more "affordable" travel tests and look again at the necessity of PCR tests for travellers from green and amber destinations.
The demands come after after Mr Javid asked the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) to investigate the cost of travel PCR tests in response to concerns about the cost for families travelling abroad.
A list of providers offering PCR tests which meet minimum standards on the government website shows more than 100 outlets charging £200 or more.
In a letter replying to Mr Javid on Monday, the CMA said it would report its recommendations within the next month," adding that it was aware of concerns about the price of Covid-19 tests for international travellers.
A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: Last week the Health and Social Care Secretary requested urgent advice from the CMA to help stamp out any exploitative behaviour in the private testing market, such as excessive pricing or misleading claims.
While we await the CMA's advice, the Government will continue to ensure testing providers are held to account by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service.
Companies that fail to meet the high standards required will be removed from our list of approved suppliers without hesitation.
Listen to our Coronavirus podcast:
There are growing calls to clean up what's being called the 'chaotic' system of Covid tests for foreign travel, ITV News Political Reporter Shehab Khan explains
Ministers are being urged to intervene over coronavirus tests for foreign travel amid widespread complaints of "rip-off" services failing to provide results in time - even with some holidaymakers being forced to fork out hundreds for the checks.
Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said he is "worried about the length of time it takes for tests and the costs of tests".
"A lot of people are returning feeling they're not entering an orderly system and frankly I think they feel they're being ripped off," he told ITV News.
He added: "I don't think the government's had a grip of borders for a very long time. If it had a grip of borders we wouldn't have the Delta variant. It is only because the border with India wasn't closed quickly enough that we're in the situation we're in."
Starmer slams the government's Covid travel policy
Vaccinated people going on holiday to an amber list country are required to pay £91 in total on average for tests in order to travel. Those who have not been vaccinated will need to pay a total of £219 on average.
Vaccinated travellers will pay around £39 for a rapid antigen test in an amber list country before returning home and around £52 for a PCR test on day two after arriving back in the UK.
If an unvaccinated person wants to go on holiday to amber list countries such as France and Spain, they'll have to pay for four coronavirus tests.
On average they'll pay £85 for a PCR test before their departure, says consumer website Which?, £39 for a rapid antigen test to return home, followed by PCR tests on days two and eight after travel, to the tune of £95 on average.
People who refuse to take the tests could be fined up to £2,000.
It is the particularly expensive PCR tests which are causing the most concern, with more than 400 companies in the UK being seen to profit from the industry.
Some can be bought for as little as £29, however there are reports of some costing as much as £200.
And many firms are failing to deliver test results or sending out damaged testing kits, according to reports.
"Labour leader Sir Keir said the government must ""ensure that tests are available quickly, turned around quickly, and they're available cheaply or free"".
""Tests have been the single most important thing almost throughout the pandemic... they're still probably the most important indicator because as you know, if you've been double-vaccinated that's not necessarily a sign of immunity from variants,"" he added."
On Monday, Health Secretary Sajid Javid wrote to the Competition and Markets Authority, asking it to investigate "excessive" costs and "exploitative practices" among PCR Covid test firms.
He said: "I know that for too many people the cost of PCR testing can act as a barrier, especially for families who want to travel together.
"We have all experienced enormous disruption to our lives over this pandemic but it is not right if some families experience yet further disruption unnecessarily because of potentially unfair practices in the market for private travel tests."
Randox, one of the biggest firms offering PCR tests, was roundly criticised after images of overflowing boxes for completed test kits were posted on social media, leading to the testing system being branded an "absolute mess".
Traveller Gavin Marshall expressed his anger at being "forced to pay Randox over the odds" for a day two PCR test for his daughter, who had recently returned from a holiday in Portugal.
He explained that he drove for half an hour to drop off his sample as there are "so few collection points", but on arrival found the box "overflowing and insecure".
The teaching assistant told PA: "I initially hesitated (and thought) 'is this ever going to get there'? But the next nearest one was about 45 minutes drive in the wrong direction and I wouldn't have got there before the deadline.
"So I had absolutely no choice but just to sort of squeeze it in on top of the box and hope for the best."
The PC Agency, a travel consultancy group, said the images demonstrate "the absolute mess that PCR testing has become".
It claimed they are proof that private laboratories "aren't in any hurry to turn around the results" and warned that personal details and samples are being "left for anyone to take".
A spokesman for Randox said: "Randox is constantly expanding and improving its Covid-19 testing capacity and associated logistics network, which is already the largest in the United Kingdom, to meet the rapidly growing demand resulting from the loosening of travel restrictions.
"Randox continues to increase the number of drop boxes across the United Kingdom, which already totals over 200, and is increasing the frequency of box collections which are already occurring multiple times per day.
"Randox is providing premium testing services in dynamic and rapidly changing circumstances and is committed to continuously improving its logistics network, to ensure that international travellers receive their results in time.
"All of the sample kits pictured will be processed."
Labour said the government "must intervene" if the firm is failing to deliver a proper service.
Labour shadow minister urges ministers to step in over PCR tests:
Shadow minister Kate Green said local health teams should managing Covid-19 rests for travellers because they've been "proven to be very effective".
"The idea that parcelling out contracts to the private sector is going to be the most effective way to do this has not been demonstrated by our experience over the last few months.
"I think using the expertise that we have in our NHS and local public health teams has been proven to deliver better results and that's something that I would like to see."
Coronavirus: What you need to know
In its latest update to the England's travel guidance, the government announced seven countries will be added to the green list and arrivals from France will no longer need to quarantine if they are fully vaccinated.
The change gives greater flexibility to holidaymakers, but as always when travelling during the pandemic, details are key.
Here's which countries are on each list, the rules for testing, the new prices for quarantining in a hotel and more.
Which countries have been added to the green list?
Austria
Germany
Slovenia
Slovakia
Latvia
Romania
Norway
The seven European nations will join holiday hotspots such as Barbados, Croatia and Madeira on the green list.
No countries are to be removed from the green list in the upcoming change.
Green, amber or red? A full list of the destinations you can and can't travel to from England
Your eight-point holiday 2021 checklist
The new travel quarantine rules if you've had both Covid jabs - six things you need to know
Will I need to be tested if I travel from a green list country to England?
People who are travelling to countries on the green list from England will still need to take a Covid test up to 72 hours before they return to England.
They will also need to take a single PCR test on or before day two of their arrival into England - but there is no requirement to quarantine unless the test result is positive.
Which countries have been added to the amber list?
India
Bahrain
Qatar
The United Arab Emirates (UAE)
These four countries will move up from the red list and join popular destinations like Portugal, Spain and the Balearic Islands.
"From 4am on Sunday 8 August, Austria, Germany, Latvia, Norway, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia will be added to the green list.
These are the other countries already on the list:"
Australia
Brunei
Bulgaria,
Caribbean Islands (Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, Barbados, Dominica, Granada, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos Islands)
Croatia
Falkland Islands
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Hong Kong
Iceland
Israel and Jerusalem
Malta
Madeira
New Zealand
Singapore
South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands
St Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
Taiwan
It's important to note that just because a country is on the UK's green list, it doesn't necessarily mean the country is accepting UK citizens - Australia being one example - so check with the relevant country's government website for their latest rules on tourist arrivals.
"People who are travelling to countries on the green list will need to take a Covid test up to 72 hours before they return to the UK and a single PCR test on or before day two of their arrival into the UK - but you do not need to quarantine unless the test result is positive.
Children aged four and under are exempt from the test."
"From 4am on Sunday 8 August, India, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates will be moved from the red to amber list. France will move from 'amber plus' back to the amber list, meaning those who were fully vaccinated no longer need to quarantine for 10 days after arriving back from France.
The countries above join more than 130 other countries on the amber list, including popular holiday destinations such as Spain, Portugal and Italy. The full list of amber list countries can be found on the UK government website."
If you're over 18 and not had two Covid vaccinations, on arrival in the UK from amber list countries you need to:
take a Covid test up to 72 hours before you return to the UK
quarantine for 10 days
take a test on or before day 2 and on or after day 8 after arriving in the UK.
However, if you've been fully vaccinated in the UK or under 18, you don't need to quarantine or take a day 8 test after you get back, but you still need to take a test on or before day 2 after arriving. You must have had your final dose of the vaccine at least 14 whole days before the date you arrive in England to be considered as fully vaccinated under the amber list rules.
Separate to these rules for UK citizens, since 2 August people fully vaccinated in the USA or most European countries will not need to quarantine if they have been in an amber list country in the 10 days before arriving. They will still need to take a test on or before day 2 after arriving.
What are the rules for amber list countries?
Unless they have been double-vaccinated in the UK or are under 18, arrivals to the UK from amber list countries need to take a test before travelling, self-isolate for 10 days, and take two test after arriving in England.
If they have been double-jabbed or are under 18, arrivals only need to take a test on or before day two of their return.
On Wednesday, the government advised arrivals from Spain and its islands to take a PCR test as their pre-departure test "as a precaution against the increased prevalence of the virus and variants in the country".
Which countries and regions have been added to the red list?
Georgia
Mexico
La Reunion
Mayoette
UK residents arriving from these places must quarantine for 10 days in a hotel.
"Those who are not British or Irish residents are allowed to travel to England from these countries.
Other popular holiday destinations on the red list include Cape Verde, Egypt and Turkey."
How much will quarantining in a hotel cost?
The price of quarantine in a hotel will increase from August 12 to "ensure taxpayers are not subsidising the cost" of the stay, the government has said.
For a single adult, the amount will climb from £1,750 to £2,285.
For a second adult, the cost will jump from £650 to £1,430. The price remains unchanged at £325 for children aged 5-12 and there remains no charge at all for children under five.
Listen to the ITV News Coronavirus podcast
Are other countries accepting holidaymakers from the UK?
A country may be on England's green/amber list, but that doesn't mean it is easy or possible for Britons to travel there.
For instance, UK holidaymakers aged over 12 must be fully vaccinated to enter Germany, while arriving in Austria from the UK is currently prohibited by Austrian law.
Therefore, it's worth checking entry requirements for your chosen destination on the government's website.
When will the changes announced on Wednesday come into effect?
4am on Sunday August 8.
What about travel rules for the Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland?
While the travel update currently only applies to England, it is often the case that the devolved nations follow suite shortly after.
Stay up to date with the changing travel situation in the UK and abroad with news, information and advice at itv.com/holidaynews
Holidays could cost up to almost three hundred pounds more per person this year.
The ban on international travel was lifted on May 17, following the government's announcement of a number of 'green list' destinations.
The list outlines countries that people can travel to without having to quarantine on their return.
They are, however, required to provide a negative PCR test before and after their holiday - and testing won't be the only additional cost for a foreign getaway this year.
Green, amber or red list? The destinations you can and can't travel to
Where can I go on holiday and why is everyone talking about Portugal?
PCR test before departure from the UK
NHS testing facilities cannot be used for travel related purposes.
People wishing to travel abroad are required to show that they've had a negative PCR test with 'Fit to Fly Certification'.
The test needs to be done between 48 and 96 hours before their flight, depending on the destination.
This test can be done in advance at the airport and comes with a certificate which will allow the person to travel abroad.
The cost for a PCR test at East Midlands Airport and Birmingham Airport is £80.
Travel tests can also be bought in Boots for a price of £99, MASTA for around £150 and Lloyds Pharmacy Online Doctor for £119.
It's important to note that as well as paperwork showing a negative coronavirus test, most countries also require travelers to fill in a "passenger locator form" online.
This contains details about where you will be staying and can be used by the relevant government.
PCR test before arriving back to the UK
Before returning to the UK from a green list country travelers must provide a negative coronavirus test, taken on or before day 2 of their return.
If that test is negative then the passenger doesn't need to self-isolate or quarantine.
The prices for return tests vary depending on country.
In Portugal they cost around 30 - as ITV News Central reporter Mark Kielesz-Levine discovered today (18 May).
Which 'green list' countries can I actually visit?
Portugal
Gibraltar
Iceland
Australia (not allowing people from the UK)
Brunei (not allowing people from the UK)
New Zealand (not allowing people from UK)
Singapore (not allowing people from UK)
Falkland Islands (far to travel)
South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands (far to travel)
St Helena, Ascension and Tristan de Cunha (far to travel)
Faroe Islands (no direct flights)
Israel and Jerusalem (Foreign office advising against travel)
Passport renewal
Following Brexit, anyone traveling abroad must have a passport that:
Has at least 6 months left until it expires
Is less than 10 years old (even if it has 6 months or more until expiry)
To renew a UK passport online it costs £75.50, plus around £5 to pay for signed delivery to return your old passport.
If you fill in and send off a paper form a passport renewal costs £85.
More expensive flights and holiday packages
Since the announcement of the green travel list flight prices have remained steady.
Phil Collings, from travel advice and holiday information company ABTA, says this is because most flights are not full - and airlines would rather keep tickets at a low cost in an attempt to fill their planes.
"A plane is cheaper to run if it's in the air", says Mr Collings, "if a plane is parked on the ground then there's still a big cost to maintain it".
However, the industry has lost millions during the pandemic and that money will no doubt need to be made back.
As more people are vaccinated and people become more confident in travelling during the summer, flight and holiday package prices could increase.
Some travel agents also say that, now we're out of lockdown, they're expecting people to "think bigger and pay more".
Read more:
What it's like on a British Airways flight from UK to Portugal as travel abroad is allowed from May 17
Tui to offer holidaymakers to green list countries £20 Covid tests
Covid: Portugal to allow UK holidaymakers despite 'state of calamity' extension
Video report by ITV News Correspondent Richard Pallot
Travellers will be able to reduce their quarantine from 14 days if they test negative for coronavirus - but it will have to be paid for privately.
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps announced overseas travellers would only have to quarantine for five days after arriving back in England, should they record a negative test result after five days.
Mr Shapps said travellers will need to pay a fee if they want to use the new tests because going abroad is "usually a discretionary activity".
Here's how the new quarantine rules work:
Under the new rules, passengers arriving back in England from December 15 from a country not on the government's travel corridor will still need to enter self-isolation.
The cost of the test, from a private firm, will add another £65 to £120 on to your travel costs.
PM urges Britons to be jolly careful as UK leaders devise Christmas plan
Covid tiers: Non-essential shops, gyms and hairdressers to reopen when lockdown ends on December 2
Results are typically issued within 24-48 hours, meaning people will likely be released from quarantine six days after arrival.
The change does not apply to people arriving in Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales, who must continue to self-isolate for 14 days.
Mr Shapps said: We have a plan in place to ensure that our route out of this pandemic is careful and balanced, allowing us to focus on what we can now do to bolster international travel while keeping the public safe.
Our new testing strategy will allow us to travel more freely, see loved ones and drive international business. By giving people the choice to test on day five, we are also supporting the travel industry as it continues to rebuild out of the pandemic.
He said he was confident people have been complying with the 14 day travel quarantine but said he recognised 14 days was "a long time for people to quarantine or self-isolate".
Mr Shapps confirmed to ITV's Good Morning Britain that those who can not pay for the test will still have to quarantine for the full period, telling ITV News the government's testing priority was key workers.
He told ITV News, people would have to "weigh up" the additional cost of the test if they want to be released from self-isolation early.
"""First of all, I wanted to make sure when we introduced this that we're not taking any tests away from the NHS - those doctors and nurses and teachers who need to be able to carry on working.
""So I've required this to be a private test that you have to get to a specific standard, which the Chief Medical Officer will specify. And the tests ranges from £65 - £120, we suspect they'll come down over a period of time,"" he said."
Mr Shapps told Good Morning Britain: "One of the things that we know is that if you provide a practical alternative to people, people generally want to do the right thing.
You've got to give them the option to be able to do the right thing, and being able to take a test means that as soon as you have a negative result, you're able to be released."
Health Secretary Matt Hancock said: This test on day five of the 14-day self-isolation period will identify positive coronavirus cases and allow those who test negative to return to work and see their loved ones while abiding by domestic coronavirus restrictions.
This will be done at the cost of the traveller to protect the capacity of NHS Test and Trace and ensure that any UK resident who has symptoms is able to get a test.
The policy change has been largely welcomed by the travel and holiday industry, which has been particularly hard hit by the pandemic.
Tim Alderslade, chief executive of Airlines UK, the industry association representing UK-registered carriers, said the announcement provided light at the end of the tunnel for the aviation industry and people wanting to go on holiday.
He predicted demand for air travel will tentatively return following the decision but said a pre-departure or domestic testing regime that can completely remove the need to self-isolate is the only way we're going to comprehensively reopen the market.
Mark Tanzer, chief executive of travel trade organisation Abta, commented: The test to release scheme in England should help to make overseas travel more attractive and manageable for both holidaymakers and business travellers."
But Ryanair boss Michael O'Leary questioned plans to allow travellers arriving in England to end their Covid-19 quarantine early if get a negative coronavirus test five days after arrival, telling ITV News he believed the government had not "thought this through particularly well".
"We think what Ryanair is advocating, which is a pre-departure Covid test - everyone who travels should get a negative test within 72-hours, three days before departure - is a much better system.
"It allows families to travel for Christmas knowing they're Covid negative, but also they don't have to quarantine on arrival and there's no need for them to quarantine because they're Covid negative. "
The government also announced it will introduce new financial support for English airports and ground handling firms in the new year.
The support will cover business rates liabilities up to £8 million at each site.
Chancellor Rishi Sunak said: The aviation industry is vital to our economy “ creating jobs and driving growth- which is why we have supported them throughout this crisis through the job retention scheme, loans and tax deferrals.
This new package of support for airports, alongside a new testing regime for international arrivals, will help the sector take off once again as we build back better from the pandemic.
Covid: Full list of destinations exempt from quarantine on return to England
Covid tiers: Can you still travel within the UK? Can you meet your friends? Your questions on the new rules answered
People travelling into the Bailiwick will be charged for their Covid tests from 14 May.
The States of Guernsey says that all travellers will need to pay a fee of £25 for each test (test on arrival as well as the test on day seven or day 13).
A States spokesperson has said that children under 12 will not be charged at this time.
Officials say this is to partially offset the "very significant" overall cost involved in providing the tests which have so far been at no cost to travellers.
ITV News Consumer Editor Chris Choi reports on the service problems in the private Covid test industry
Anyone still aiming to go abroad this summer will need to buy Covid-19 tests, but we've found that there have been more than £1 million in refunds from the sector - and one industry insider has told ITV News about the delays some customers have had getting test results.
Covid testing for travel has rapidly created a whole new consumer market which can seem complex and costly.
More than 400 testing firms are now offering services across a wide range of prices and categories.
PCR tests in this sector range from £27 to almost £400 each.
Over the past few months ITV News has heard from people with complaints about delays and mix-ups receiving their test kits and results.
The consumer organisation Which? is so concerned about testing for travel is has said: "The government must urgently take steps to ensure all results are delivered on time, every time."
Testing firms say that problems account for only a tiny percentage of the high volumes of work they have done in a short amount of time, setting up new systems to cope with demand.
The test firms also stress that many problems have been caused by other factors including delivery delays.
These tests become integral to people's travel plans and quarantine arrangements, so if things do go wrong it can have knock-on effects.
Take a look on social media and you will find plenty of examples of the high stress levels that can be caused to customers when things go wrong.
Now a worker from one of the testing firms has spoken to us anonymously.
She thinks people who have had poor service deserve far better.
"They are not getting value for money, they are not getting their test kits on time, they are not getting their results in time," the woman said.
The test company she works at, Anglia DNA Services, told us delays and errors affected less than one percent of its work.
They've apologised, given refunds and say they resolved any problems quickly.
"They are not getting value for money," a test firm worker tells ITV News
The insider we spoke to believes more must be done to improve services in this sector.
"There's a danger of people over-extending their quarantine unable to go to work commitments, or even children missing exams."
Tejinder Sahota was a customer of the same firm in April. When he returned from his wedding in Canada, the test result he needed to leave quarantine came late.
Living with elderly parents, he was anxious.
'You do end up having to put things on hold'
"You do end up having to put things on hold.
"I was living in a slightly separate part of the house, I was wearing a mask indoors I was doing all those things to protect the family and not going out."
The company refunded, apologised and says it used special couriers at its own expense to help customers affected by a small number of problems, which were beyond its control. The firm says such issues are not representative of its service.
The head of another test firm that had postal problems delivering results, insists those issues have been fixed.
'I think that better policing of the list would help' says private test insider
Aaron Kravitz of Now Test says more scrutiny of firms on the government's approved list would help.
"I think that better policing of the list would help unfortunately there's a resource cost to that and in effect the only thing they could really do is kind of mystery shop every one of these firms."
The Department of Health told us it monitors and evaluates firms that provide tests for those travelling abroad, removing any that fail to meet minimum standards from its approved lists.
With the peak holiday season ahead, test firms may yet be to face their biggest challenge.
Stay up to date with the changing travel situation in the UK and abroad with news, information and advice at itv.com/holidaynews.
Green list: These are the countries that have just been added and whether you need to quarantine when you arrive there
Surge testing has started in Cumbria following an increase in the number of confirmed cases of the more transmissable Delta variant of coronavirus, first identified in India.
Health officials said it is 'critical' that everyone in Cumbria between the ages of 12 and 30 gets tested for Covid-19 - even if they don't have symptoms.
The county's public health director says infection numbers in this age group are surging due to the more transmissible Delta variant.
PCR testing is available at seven testing sites across Cumbria or can be carried out at home with a test kit.
People who are not at attending school can visit one of Cumbria's seven testing sites between 8am and 8pm from Saturday 19 June 2021. There is no need to book an appointment for the test.
Parents/carers of school age children will be informed of testing arrangements by their childs school.
"If you cannot attend a test site you can get a test kit delivered to your home via https://www.gov.uk/get-coronavirus-test. Choose the I have been advised to get a test by local Public Health officials' option.
Where can I get tested?"
Carlisle RTS, Carlisle Lake District Airport, Irvington, Carlisle, CA6 4NW
Carlisle Cecil Street LTS, Cecil Street Car Park, Carlisle, CA1 1NX
Penrith Sandgate Car Park LTS, Penrith Sandgate Car Park, 32 Albert Street, Penrith, CA11 7XA
West Cumbria Allerdale House LTS, Allerdale House Overflow Car Park, Workington, CA14 9SA
Barrow-in-Furness Town Hall LTS, Barrow Town Hall Courtyard, Cornwallis Street, Barrow, LA14 2LG
Copeland Castle Meadows LTS, Castle Meadows Car Park, Whitehaven, CA28 7RG
Kendal County Hall LTS, Kendal County Hall Car Park, Busher Walk, Kendal, LA9 4RQ
Cumbria's Director of Public Health, Colin Cox, said: Infections are rising fastest among young people. That's why it is critical everyone aged 12-30 in Cumbria take a PCR test this week “ regardless of whether they have symptoms or not.
Getting as many people tested as possible will help us find those people are infectious but don't know it, this is an important way we can slow the spread.
I know it's an inconvenience to do this, but it's a simple process and as we've seen this week with the Prime Minister's announcement, if we don't get the virus back under control we can expect restrictions to remain in place which is something none of us want.
Nearly 150,000 Cumbrians have not been vaccinated yet and around 85,000 people have only received one dose.
People who have only had one dose have significantly less protection from the new Delta variant of the virus which is now circulating.
People in Guernsey are able to request a test online if they are required to provide proof of a negative PCR Covid-19 test for their travel destination or carrier from today (Monday 26 April).
Once the new online form is complete, a member of the scheduling team will contact you to make the necessary arrangements. Then a payment will be taken for the tests before they are carried out at the Prince Elizabeth Hospital drive-through testing centre.
Pre-travel PCR tests will cost £83 per test.
The Primary Care team already provide this service in their own practices across Guernsey. Travellers are able to continue using Primary Care for pre-travel testing.
But this new online system is an additional service which ensures testing can be undertaken seven days a week.
Outbound travellers should complete the online form 48 hours before the test is required.
Results will be sent via email within 24 to 48 hours, although it may be quicker.
The email will include a letter confirming the negative result which can be shared with your travel destination or carrier.
Travellers should note that the period of time before travel is determined by the travel destination of carrier. It is their individual responsibility to ensure that they book the correct date for tests to be carried out.
Live updates: Number of coronavirus cases in the Channel Islands
Updates on Covid vaccinations in the Channel Islands
Coronavirus: All the information and advice for the Channel Islands in one place
Britons who do travel to Portugal despite the country being placed on the amber list will no longer have to take a PCR test to go on holiday.
The Foreign Office has confirmed, following a change in guidelines in Portugal, that while you will still need to provide a negative test to enter the country, it can be either a PCR test or the cheaper lateral flow, antigen test.
PCR tests need to have been taken 72 hours before arrival, while lateral flow tests can be taken 24 hours beforehand.
FO advice states: "With the exception of children up to the age of 2, you must have proof of a negative COVID-19 test to travel to or through Portugal. The test can be:
a Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (NAAT), including RT-PCR, taken within 72 hours of travel, or
an Antigen test that meets the performance standards set out in the EU common list of Rapid Antigen Tests, taken within 24 hours of travel.
"You must show your test certificate before you board your flight to Portugal. Your airline is likely to deny boarding if you cannot show this at check-in. Check with your airline before you travel."
Portugal airport chaos as thousands of holidaymakers rush back before country moves to amber travel list
Where can you go on holiday this year? New data reveals UK hotspots already 90% booked
Portugal moves to amber list: What does this mean if I've booked a holiday or if I have travelled there?
Regardless of whether Britons do travel, they will still have to self-isolate on return for a period of 10 days now that Portugal is on the amber list.
Thousands of Britons had to scramble back to the UK from Portugal a week ago to beat the deadline as the threat of the Delta variant prompted ministers to move the country from the green travel list.
"Tourists wanting to beat the deadline were hit by a combination of many flights being sold out, and the handful of available seats being sold at inflated prices.
Many holidaymakers and travel firms expressed anger when the announcement on Portugal was made, as it came just 17 days after the ban on international leisure travel was lifted."
Popular foreign tourist destinations have been added to the green travel list this summer, but some countries have toughened up requirements for entry.
At 4am on Monday, Bulgaria and Hong Kong will be added to the green list and Croatia and Taiwan will be moved onto the green watch list, meaning they are in danger of being put on the amber list.
People arriving in the UK from green list destinations are not required to self-isolate, although the four nations all have their own lists.
Each of the green list destinations have their own testing and quarantine rules for travellers arriving into the country.
So what does it mean when countries are added to the green list and will you need to quarantine when you arrive in any of them? We have all the details for you.
Which countries have recently been added to the green or green watch lists?
Bulgaria
Hong Kong
Croatia
Taiwan
What does it mean when a country is on the green list?
People who are travelling to countries on the green list from England will still need to take a Covid test up to 72 hours before they return to England and a single PCR test on or before day two of their arrival into England - but you do not need to quarantine unless the test result is positive.
Children aged four and under are exempt from the test.
ITV News video producer Natalia Jorquera explains what the changes could mean for you
Do I need to quarantine or take a test on arrival to Croatia, Bulgaria, Hong Kong or Taiwan?
Croatia
To avoid quarantine in Croatia you must present a negative Covid-19 antigen or PCR test, or proof of vaccination, or a doctor's certificate of recovery following a positive test result between 11 and 180 days prior.
To enter via proof of vaccination you must have had either a two-dose vaccine course from Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Gamaleya or Sinopharm or a certificate of receipt of a one-dose vaccine such as the Johnson & Johnson jab.
"Croatia will accept the NHS Covid pass both as a letter or via the app.
Children under 12 are exempt from the requirements."
If you have not got any of the accepted ways of gaining entry, a test can be taken upon arrival in Croatia but you will have to self-isolate until you have the result.
Bulgaria
Bulgaria has a similar green, amber and red travel system to that of the UK.
The UK is currently amber on Bulgaria's list.
This means if you are entering Bulgaria from the UK you must present one of three documents.
First, a vaccination certificate indicating an approved vaccine schedule has been completed at least 14 days before arrival.
Second, a document showing a positive result from a PCR or rapid antigen test for people who have recovered from Covid-19.
"Third, a negative PCR test performed within 72 hours before entry into Bulgaria or a rapid antigen test performed up to 48 hours before entry.
Additionally, at least 5% of all arrivals from amber countries will be subject to a rapid antigen test at random."
If you test positive for Covid-19, you will be required to self-isolate for 14 days.
"There is also a mandatory 10-day self-isolation requirement for anyone who has been in close contact with someone who has tested positive for Covid-19.
Bulgarian authorities have said they will only accept the letter version of the NHS Covid pass, not the app."
If you do not have any of the documents required for entry then you must quarantine for 10 days, this can be shortened after receiving a negative test.
If the UK was ever raised to red, then all people arriving in Bulgaria except Bulgarian citizens would be refused entry.
Hong Kong
The UK is currently on the Hong Kong government's list of "extremely high-risk places".
This means anyone except Hong Kong residents arriving from the UK will be refused entry.
Taiwan
Taiwan has not allowed any foreign nationals to enter since the start of the pandemic and there is no indication as to when this rule will change.
Anyone seeking entry must seek special permission from the government.
What other countries are already on the green list and what are their rules?
Malta
To avoid quarantine in Malta, Brits now need to be fully vaccinated.
Authorities in Malta have revealed they will only accept printed letters sent by the NHS as proof.
These letters can take "up to five working days" to arrive, which means British tourists - even those who are fully vaccinated - could be turned away at the airport or the Maltese border.
This also applies to children aged between 12 and 16, who will not be allowed to holiday on the island unless they have been fully vaccinated.
Children under 12, however, will be permitted if they are accompanying parents or guardians who have had both doses.Those aged between five and 11 must also show evidence of a negative PCR test taken within the previous 72 hours.
No test is required for those aged under five.
The addition of two holiday destinations (Bulgaria and Croatia) to the green list which allow entry to UK visitors will be welcome to many because most of the places on the green list do not allow British people to enter.
Madeira
To enter Madeira, you must have proof of a negative Covid-19 test or have had both doses of the Covid vaccine at least 15 days prior to travel.
Passengers must take a PCR test 72 hours before travel and upload the test result - children aged 12 and under are exempt.
If you have had two doses of a coronavirus vaccine, you will be exempt from showing a PCR test on entry and Madeira will accept your NHS letter to demonstrate your vaccination status.
All passengers (except for children aged 12 and under) will need to complete and submit a traveller questionnaire.
Australia, New Zealand and Singapore
Australia, New Zealand and Singapore are all closed to foreign tourists.
Gibraltar
If you are fully vaccinated, you must upload your vaccination certificate on the Passenger Locator Form.
You must also book a Covid-19 lateral flow test before arriving in Gibraltar.
This test must take place within 24 hours of arrival.
If you are remaining for more than seven days, you must also take a second test on day five.
Iceland
Brits can travel to Iceland if they can prove they have been fully-vaccinated against Covid or have recovered from the illness.
Israel
Travellers who have been vaccinated or recovered from Covid outside of Israel must isolate on arrival in the country until they take an antibody test and test positive in an accredited Israeli laboratory.
Caribbean Islands
Anguilla
If you want to travel to Anguilla, you will need prior approval from the government's health team. You can apply online here.
If you are accepted, you will need to provide evidence of a negative PCR test taken three to five days before the planned date of your arrival.
If you are fully vaccinated you will need to self-isolate for seven days on arrival, and if you have not been fully vaccinated you will need to self-isolate for 10 to 14 days on arrival.
Antigua and Barbuda
Passengers aged 12 years and above must provide evidence of a negative PCR test. On arrival, passengers must complete a Health Declaration Form and will be subject to temperature checks by Port Health Authorities.
All arrivals will be monitored for coronavirus for up to 14 days. The Ministry of Health says it is the decision of the Quarantine Authority on who must self-isolate or quarantine on arrival.
British Indian Ocean Territory
The British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) is not a tourist destination.
Barbados
All travellers from the UK arriving in Barbados must present a negative Covid PCR test taken no more than three days in advance of your flight's arrival, but unvaccinated and vaccinated arrivals will be required to spend some time self-isolating.
Passengers must also submit an Embarkation/Disembarkation (ED) card 24 hours prior to travel, to which they should upload their negative test result via Travel Form.
If you arrive in Barbados from the UK without a negative PCR test you may be denied entry to the country.
Dominicana
Passengers must complete an online questionnaire 24 hours before arrival and have a PCR test 72 hours before landing. Both must be submitted prior to entry.
A pinprick Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) will be taken on arrival. If the RDT is negative, then the traveller must self-isolate in a government-certified facility for five days before having a further PCR test. If it is positive, a further PCR swab test will be carried out. If the PCR test is positive, a 14-day quarantine will be necessary.
Grenada
Pending a negative PCR test administered on entry, travellers will be required to quarantine for up to 48 hours. All travellers must pre-book approved quarantine accommodation and pre-pay for their test.
Vaccinated arrivals
For vaccinated arrivals, you will have to take a rapid Covid test at the airport or at your government-approved accommodation and you will have to remain on the premises of your accommodation and follow the quarantine rules until you receive the results of your second test.
If you test negative you will not have to quarantine further, but if the result is positive you will be required to self-isolate - you will be transferred to the government isolation facility for 24 hours and you can then request to self-isolate at your holiday accommodation or government approved isolation property.
Unvaccinated arrivals
On arrival, you will have to quarantine at approved facilities - either a designated hotel, villa or a government approved facility - and you will be required to take a second PCR test five days after arrival.
You will need to remain in your hotel room, and may be required to wear an electronic tracking bracelet until you receive the results of your second test - if it's negative you will not be subject to further quarantine.
Cayman Islands
Airports in the Cayman Islands are closed to all inbound and outbound international passenger flights.
Montserrat
Only resident permit holders and Montserratians are allowed to enter Montserrat.
Turks and Caicos Islands
Anyone arriving to the Turks and Caicos Islands is required to obtain pre-travel authorisation via the Turks and Caicos Islands Assured Portal.
This requires evidence of a negative Covid-19 test from a reputable facility taken less than five days prior to arrival in the Turks and Caicos Islands, proof of health/travel insurance with Covid-19 cover and a completed health screening questionnaire.
What other countries are already on the green list?
The addition of Malta, Balearic Islands and Madeira will be a welcome addition for travellers returning to England, as the majority of countries previously on the green list are closed to international tourists, such as Australia, New Zealand and Singapore.
Here are the other green list countries:
Brunei
Falkland Islands
Faroe Islands
South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands
St Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
Is it worth travelling abroad in 2021? New figures show what Brits are thinking
Green, amber or red list? The destinations you can and can't travel to from England
Ambitious mass testing plans that could keep hopes of Christmas parties alive would cost as much as £100 billion, according to reports.
Leaked documents seen by the BMJ suggest that the Operation Moonshot project “ which would see millions of UK-wide tests carried out daily “ could have a price tag close to that of the £114 billion budget given to NHS England in 2018/19.
Boris Johnson believes the scheme could help sport and entertainment venues reopen fully and allow people to socially mix in large groups again with on-the-day tests.
However, the plans previewed by Mr Johnson have been met with a mixed reaction from the health and scientific community, with concerns raised over the implications of a negative test result.
In the near future we hope to start using testing to identify people who are negative, who don't have coronavirus, who are not infectious.
So we can allow them to behave in a more normal way in the knowledge they can't infect anyone else with the virus, the prime minister said at a Downing Street coronavirus update on Wednesday.
Watch Wednesday's coronavirus update in full:
England's deputy chief medical officer, Dr Jenny Harries, said the success of Moonshot would depend on how it is handled.
She told ITV's Peston: We do want to get back to as much normality as we can and any opportunity to do that through a new testing programme or using different testing technology is clearly a good thing to be following, but it's not quite as simple as just doing that.
Deputy Chief Medical Officer tells Peston: 'Take action now' to avoid second wave of coronavirus
Moonshot has received mixed reviews from the scientific community, including from Dr Chaand Nagpaul, council chairman of the British Medical Association (BMA), who said it was unclear how it would work given the huge problems currently seen with lab capacity.
And the notion of opening up society based on negative tests of those without symptoms needs to be approached with caution “ both because of the high rate of ˜false negatives™ and the potential to miss those who are incubating the virus, Dr Nagpaul added.
Professor Jose Vazquez-Boland, chair of infectious diseases a University of Edinburgh, said: The focus of testing currently remains on confirmation of suspected cases (people with symptoms), thus missing the point that most community transmission comes from those who are asymptomatic.
Only a mass screening programme, such as this alternative plan announced by the Prime Minister, which involves the regular testing of all the population for asymptomatic transmitters, can keep Covid-19 under control and eventually lead to its eradication.
Dr Joshua Moon, research fellow in the Science Research Policy Unit (SPRU) at the University of Sussex Business School, raised concerns about the plans.
He said: A negative result could be that the individual is truly negative and therefore not infectious, or it could be that the individual is infected but early in the incubation period so isn't testing positive yet, or it could be that the test itself didn't capture enough viral material on the swab or saliva to test positive.
In only one of these cases should the person be moving around as normal.
Dr David Strain, clinical senior lecturer at the University of Exeter and chairman of the BMA's medical academic staff committee, said: The mass-testing strategy is fundamentally flawed, in that it is being based on technology that does not, as yet, exist.
The Prime Minister's suggestion that this will be as simple as getting a pregnancy test that will give results within 15 minutes is unlikely, if not impossible, in the timescale he was suggesting to get the country back on track.
The worry is that comments such as these may undermine the credibility of some of the other very responsible measures that were announced, notably the halting of the larger social gatherings, delaying the reopening of large venues and moving the rule of six from guidance to law.
Ministers have faced increasing pressure in recent days over availability of tests, with many people reporting being sent hundreds of miles from home to get checked for the illness.
The new testing plans come as the prime minister admitted it was too early to say whether big parties could be held over the festive season this year.
Speaking on Wednesday, the prime minister hoped that we could be able to get some aspects of our lives back to normal by Christmas and pointed to mass testing as something which could help society open back up further.
Shadow Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Affairs, Lisa Nandy said: "The Prime Minister is ignoring the very real problems in the system at the moment.
"If people can't even get a test when they've got symptoms and they've been asked to travel hundreds of miles at the moment, it's very difficult to have confidence that the government is going to be able to reach 10 million tests in capacity."
She added: "What we need right now is a sense of realism, we need the government to sort out the problems that have emerged with the system as it is."
Coronavirus: Six person limit could be in place for months, sparking Christmas concerns
For now, however, Mr Johnson urged people to limit their social contact as much as possible as he confirmed that social gatherings of more than six people will be outlawed in England from Monday.
Lockdown rules could also be tightened in other parts of the UK, as rates of Covid-19 infection have risen across the country in recent days.
Meanwhile the latest figures in the Government's test and trace will be released on Thursday.
Last week, the number of close contacts of people who tested positive for Covid-19 being reached through Test and Trace was at its lowest since the system was launched.
On Wednesday, a further 2,659 positive cases were confirmed across the UK, taking the total up to 355,219.
Positive results have increased from from 12.5 per 100,000 people to 19.7 per 100,000 in the UK in the last week “ with a particular rise in infections among young people.
Infections are most prevalent among the 19 to 21-year-old age group, with 54 cases per 100,000 people.
In Northern Ireland, it is expected that restrictions will be tightened on Thursday, while in Scotland, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon will announce the latest review of lockdown rules north of the border.
Ms Sturgeon had already warned her latest review was likely to take a very cautious approach.
Exclusive: SAGE scientist tells Peston coronavirus cases 'increasing exponentially'
What was the government's biggest Coronavirus mistake?
Rise in coronavirus cases a 'great concern', deputy chief medical officer warns
Deborah Harkins, Director of Public Health, Calderdale
People who live, work or study in Ryburn, Sowerby Bridge, Illingworth or Mixenden are being asked to get tested due to rapidly increasing cases.
Extra testing continues in the Park, Todmorden and Warley areas.
COVID-19 infection rates are still rising across Calderdale. On Sunday 20 June, the latest rate was 137 per 100,000 - a 33% increase compared to the previous week.
The Delta variant, which spreads more quickly, now makes up the majority of cases.
In Park, Todmorden and Warley, 7500 people had a PCR test between 13 and 19 June “ double the number compared to the week before.
Cllr Tim Swift, Calderdale Council's Leader, said Calderdale now has the highest COVID testing rate in the region.
Rapidly increasing case rates in some parts of the borough mean we're now offering extra PCR testing to people without symptoms in areas with the highest case rates and where there is a high risk of transmission.
Todmorden, Park, Warley, Ryburn, Sowerby Bridge, Illingworth and Mixenden residents without symptoms can get a COVID-19 test at the following places:
Asda overflow car park: Thrum Hall Lane, Halifax, HX1 4PG.
Daisy Street Car Park: Brighouse, HD6 1EL.
Todmorden Leisure Centre: Ewood Lane, Todmorden OL14 7DF. Each day until Friday 18th June (9am to 5pm).
Todmorden: Rose Street, OL14 5AT. (Mobile Testing Unit). Wednesday 23rd to Saturday 26th June (9am to 5.30pm).
Warley: Grace Baptist Church, Roils Head Road, Halifax, HX2 0LH. (mobile testing unit) Tuesday 22nd and Wednesday 23rd June (9 am to 5 pm).
Park: Madni Mosque, 17 - 131 Gibbet Street, Halifax, HX1 5BP. (mobile testing unit. Thursday 24th and Friday 25th June (9.30am to 5.30pm).
Mixenden: Mixenden Activity Centre, Clough Lane, Halifax, HX2 8SH. (Mobile testing unit). Tuesday 22nd June and Friday 25th June (9am to 5 pm).
You can walk-up to these sites and do not need to book an appointment. More information can be found here.
New Covid-19 infections in Cumbria nearly doubled in the week ending 18 June, with 382 new cases. This is up from 198 the previous week. Cases have almost doubled in each of the last three weeks.
Cumbria's case rate of 76 per 100,000 population remains below the national (98/100k) and regional averages (233/100k).
19 of the top 20 worst affected local authority areas are in the North West.
Infection rates vary significantly between age groups, with rates in the 12-24 age group in Cumbria sitting at 243/100k compared to just 16/100k among the over 60s.
Schools are being badly affected, with 55 currently dealing with incidents, 10 in full outbreak status and three schools currently closed.
In response, last Friday Cumbria launched surge testing, asking everyone aged 12-30 to get a PCR test. School age children are being offered testing in school, while others can attend a local PCR test site or get a test delivered to their home via GOV.UK.
The number of people being admitted to hospital in Cumbria as a result of Covid-19 has remained low.
Colin Cox, Cumbria's Director of Public Health, said:
The rapid spread of covid is concerning, particularly among younger age groups but we are not yet seeing a significant impact on our hospitals which is good news and reflects success of the vaccine roll-out.
However, the high number of cases is causing serious disruption in schools, with this week having the highest number of schools affected at any one time during the pandemic. Our contact tracing work has shown infections started to rise after half-term when people had been on holiday or mixed more widely, but transmission is now happening within schools and families.
Our surge testing campaign continues, and I'd like to thank the thousands of people who have already heeded the call and been tested. By helping us find people who are infectious, surge testing gives us a chance to get a grip on this and prevent further spread.
Overall, the basic public health advice is still crucial “ wash hands regularly, wear a face covering, give people space, meet outside where possible, get vaccinated, get tested if you have symptoms or are asked to do so. If we just keep going for a while longer, we will get through this.
Vaccination is now available to everyone aged over 18. People can book their vaccination at www.nhs.uk.
The latest COVID-19 situation report for Cumbria can be found at: www.cumbria.gov.uk/stopthespread
Fully vaccinated travellers from the UK can now visit France without having to quarantine on their return after the country was removed from the amber plus list.
The move brings France in line with the Covid travel rules for the rest of Europe and the United States, meaning double-jabbed visitors will not have to quarantine at home on their return.
Meanwhile, visitors to Mexico had to rush back ahead of the 4am deadline to avoid hotel quarantine after it was moved to the red list.
As well as France moving on to the amber list, from early on Sunday morning, seven other countries were added to the green list for travel, providing a huge boost for those hoping to go abroad this summer.
What are the rules for people returning from each category?
Green: No need to self-isolate. Take a pre-departure test and a PCR test on day two of your arrival in the UK.
Amber: Self-isolate for 10 days, unless you are double-vaccinated, under 18, or receive a negative test result at least five days after arrival. Take a pre-departure test, and PCR tests on day two and day eight of your arrival in the UK.
Red: Spend 10 days in a quarantine hotel. Take a pre-departure test, and PCR tests on day two and day eight of your arrival in the UK. Travellers are only allowed into the UK if they live here.
The change means holidaymakers will be able to return from the following countries without having to quarantine regardless of their vaccination status: Austria, Germany, Slovenia, Slovakia, Latvia, Romania and Norway.
India, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates have also joined the amber list, allowing fully vaccinated returnees restriction free travel.
"From 4am on Sunday 8 August, Austria, Germany, Latvia, Norway, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia will be added to the green list.
These are the other countries already on the list:"
Australia
Brunei
Bulgaria,
Caribbean Islands (Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, Barbados, Dominica, Granada, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos Islands)
Croatia
Falkland Islands
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Hong Kong
Iceland
Israel and Jerusalem
Malta
Madeira
New Zealand
Singapore
South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands
St Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
Taiwan
It's important to note that just because a country is on the UK's green list, it doesn't necessarily mean the country is accepting UK citizens - Australia being one example - so check with the relevant country's government website for their latest rules on tourist arrivals.
"People who are travelling to countries on the green list will need to take a Covid test up to 72 hours before they return to the UK and a single PCR test on or before day two of their arrival into the UK - but you do not need to quarantine unless the test result is positive.
Children aged four and under are exempt from the test."
"From 4am on Sunday 8 August, India, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates will be moved from the red to amber list. France will move from 'amber plus' back to the amber list, meaning those who were fully vaccinated no longer need to quarantine for 10 days after arriving back from France.
The countries above join more than 130 other countries on the amber list, including popular holiday destinations such as Spain, Portugal and Italy. The full list of amber list countries can be found on the UK government website."
If you're over 18 and not had two Covid vaccinations, on arrival in the UK from amber list countries you need to:
take a Covid test up to 72 hours before you return to the UK
quarantine for 10 days
take a test on or before day 2 and on or after day 8 after arriving in the UK.
However, if you've been fully vaccinated in the UK or under 18, you don't need to quarantine or take a day 8 test after you get back, but you still need to take a test on or before day 2 after arriving. You must have had your final dose of the vaccine at least 14 whole days before the date you arrive in England to be considered as fully vaccinated under the amber list rules.
Separate to these rules for UK citizens, since 2 August people fully vaccinated in the USA or most European countries will not need to quarantine if they have been in an amber list country in the 10 days before arriving. They will still need to take a test on or before day 2 after arriving.
As well as Mexico, Georgia, La Reunion and Mayotte have all been added to the red list in order "to safeguard domestic vaccine rollout", meaning anyone entering the UK from these countries mus quarantine in a government approved hotel at their own expense for 10 days.
On Wednesday, the government announced that the price of staying in a quarantine hotel is being increased from £1,750 to £2,285 to "ensure taxpayers are not subsidising the costs" of a stay.
For a second adult, the price has jumped from £650 to £1,430 - an increase of £780.
Only UK and Irish nationals are allowed to land in the UK from a red list country and they'll have to pay the inflated price from August 12.
The price will better reflect the increased costs of staying in a quarantine hotel, including transport to the hotel, security, provision of welfare services and the two PCR tests which must be taken on day two and day eight of the stay, the government said.
The cost remains unchanged at £325 for children aged 5-12 and free for children under 5.
The government said the announced changes are designed to give travellers and the travel sector "more certainty" but it warned all adjustments "will be kept under review, and further action may be taken to protect public health".
Stay up to date with the changing travel situation in the UK and abroad with news, information and advice at itv.com/holidaynews
Good Morning Britain's Jonathan Swain shows viewers what it is like on a British Airways flight from London to Lisbon
As Brits are allowed to fly away for holidays, Good Morning Britain's Jonathan Swain offered viewers a look inside a British Airways aeroplane with Covid restrictions.
The ITV correspondent boarded a flight from London to Lisbon on Monday, May 17, as lockdown restrictions eased further with many businesses reopening, indoor socialising allowed once again and the foreign travel ban lifted for England and Wales.
However, there are Covid restrictions in place, with separate regulations for people flying in from green, amber and red list countries.
With Portugal on the green list, Brits arriving from the country will not need to quarantine, and will only be required to take one post-arrival coronavirus test.
The cost of coronavirus tests for one person to travel to Portugal is 'well over £300'
Where can I go on holiday, what are the rules, and why's everybody talking about Portugal?
Swain told GMB viewers the cost of tests could be "almost prohibitively expensive" for a family-of-four travelling to Portugal.
He said: "The big thing though I have to say is, to get on board one of these flights, it takes a lot of preparation, a lot of expense beforehand.
"You have to take three Covid tests. One before we flew, that was on Friday. We have to take one when we arrive today. I have to book a video call with a nurse to make sure I'm taking it.
Might Portugal ban Brits again? When will the wider EU ban lift?
"And then we have one when we land two days afterwards. So that's three tests in total, costing well over £300 and that's just for one person.
"Imagine if you were a family-of-four - that suddenly becomes almost prohibitively expensive, I think."
He added travellers have to complete a passenger locator form for Portugal before checking in, and there are documents that need to be shown to BA before they are allowed to check in.
Jonathan Swain shows viewers the economy section of the BA plane
Towels 1.5m apart and masks on the beach - what Brits can look forward to when holidaying in Portugal
According to BA, the air on planes is filtered and seats are thoroughly sanitised before people embark on the flight. There are also hand sanitising measures, Swain said.
Sean Doyle, British Airways CEO, said the filtration system, alongside the testing of passengers and mask wearing measures, makes its aeroplanes "one of the safest places you can be".
He explained: "The air quality in an aircraft cabin is similar to an operating theatre. In fact, we replace the air every three minutes. so it's a very safe environment."
Showing viewers around the business class section of the aeroplane, Swain said people are sat with at least a one-seat gap.
What rules are being relaxed in all four nations of the UK on Monday?
But in the economy section, passengers were seen sitting shoulder-to-shoulder. Many passengers were seen with their masks on, although they are allowed to take them off when they are eating or if they are exempt.
GMB Presenter Adil Ray admitted "it looks a bit scary" seeing "that many people together" but said: "If they've all had tests and like you say, it's all been sanitised, then it's about as safe as it can be".
Prime Minister Boris Johnson urged people to proceed with the easing of lockdown "with a heavy dose of caution" as an Indian variant has been identified in the UK.
Mr Johnson said the government is keeping the Indian variant under close observation.
Quizzed about the possibility of long queues at Heathrow Airport, airport CEO John Holland-Kaye said there have been queues of up to six hours in the last few months, although it has been "unusual".
He said those issues were caused by Border Force not having enough officers on the desks with all the new checks in place.
He addressed concerns, saying: "I've been assured by the head of Border Force they have now put the processes in place, the automation, the extra staff, to make sure that won't happen and we can get people through the border quickly and easily."
He explained checks for a negative test and that the passenger locator form is filled are now done automatically and in advance, rather than by an individual officer.
On the risk of people arriving from red, amber and green countries mixing at the airport, he said those passengers will be segregated in queues and Heathrow is speaking to the Department of Health to provide an arrivals facility for passengers from red list countries.
Mr Holland-Kaye said that facility may be in place by summer.
Portugal's green travel list status prompts 'surge' in bookings as travel industry hits out at sparse list
How to use your NHS app as a vaccine passport for foreign travel
Green, amber or red list? The destinations you can and can't travel to from England
Surge testing is being expanded across Lancashire as five areas of the region fall into the top 10 for highest infection rates for Covid-19 due to the Indian variant.
People living, studying and working in areas including Burnley, Pendle, Hyndburn and Rossendale are being urged to take a PCR test even if they do not have symptoms.
NHS Test and Trace is working with local authorities across the county to launch additional testing and genomic sequencing to trace the variant, now known as VOC-21APR-02.
Mobile testing units and Covid-19 tests are being deployed to higher educational settings, while door-to-door testing is also taking place to find and isolate cases.
The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said the people who tested positive for the Indian variant have been told to self-isolate and their contacts are being identified.
It comes as eight local authorities across the North West fell into the top 10 in the country for rate increases.
Rates are rising fastest in Rossendale, while Blackburn with Darwen's rates are also climbing, along with neighbouring Hyndburn.
It's led to suggestions that the June 21st deadline for lifting restrictions may have to be delayed for parts of Lancashire. The county's Director of Public Health Sakthi Karunanithi says his teams are concentrating not on deadlines but science
Bolton is still the worst area of the country - recording 403.1 cases per 100,000 people.
Covid-19 case rates per 100,000 in the week up to 24 May
Bolton - 403.1 up from 385.3
Blackburn with Darwen - 355.4 up from 186.4
Rossendale - 212.6 up from 40.6
Bedford - 195.0 up from 141.4
Kirklees - 109.6 up from 80.3
Hyndburn - 103.6 up from 51.8
Burnley - 95.6 up from 58.5
Manchester - 78.5 up from 42.7
Bury - 72.8 up from 46.1
Preston - 69.9 up from 44.7
Pendle - 69.5 up from 42.3
Chorley - 66.0 up from 47.4
Councils will confirm the areas where additional testing will be offered in their boroughs "shortly" and will also contact residents directly to ensure people come forward for testing.
Blackburn with Darwen has asked for military assistance to help with its testing, with the Chief Executive of the Council Denise Park urging everybody to play their part in the fight to bring down infection rates.
Along with increased testing in the Lancashire boroughs, so-called "enhanced contact tracing", where tracers look back over an extended period of time to determine the route of transmission, will be used for those who test positive for a variant of concern.
People who have symptoms can book free tests online or by phone, while those without symptoms are advised to visit their local council's website for more information.
The DHSC said: "The Government and its scientific experts are closely monitoring the evolving situation and rates of variants, and we will not hesitate to take additional action as necessary."
The latest surge testing comes after it emerged that 6,959 cases of the Indian variant of coronavirus had been confirmed in the UK up to May 26, a rise of 3,535 on the previous week.
Seven further areas in England have more than 100 confirmed cases of the Indian variant: Leicester (197), Sefton (175), Nottingham (158), Wigan (113), Central Bedfordshire (109), Manchester (105) and Hillingdon (102), PHE added.
Surge testing being stepped up in Blackburn with Darwen as cases of 'Variant of Concern' rise
Soldiers go door to door to halt rising rates in Bolton
Covid-19 vaccinations to be handed out to over-18s in eight Manchester areas
Tap above to watch video report by Simon Harris
Compulsory Covid tests could make air travel affordable only for rich people, an airport boss today warned.
London Southend Airport chief executive Glyn Jones fears budget airline passengers could be put off taking foreign holidays because of the test costs and quarantine.
World-first coronavirus vaccine booster study begins in UK
PCR tests are mandatory for air passengers arriving in the UK and also for outbound passengers travelling to some foreign destinations.
A private medical company has opened a testing clinic at Southend airport. Tests are expected to cost £99.
"The costs of the test both for example before you get into a country and then before you get back to the UK and after you get back to the UK are so high that I've been talking to people within the care sector, and they've said they've had to cancel their holidays just because of the costs of the test," said Glyn Jones.
"If we get to a situation in which a test which is required and is required multiple times, is three times the price of a ticket on a low-cost carrier then we do risk reducing it to the province of the rich, which it was many years ago," he added.
Southend airport is due to reopen to passenger flights on May 28th after a six-month 'hibernation' because of lockdown restrictions.
The airport was used by 2.15m passengers in 2019 but that dropped to 147,000 in 2020 because of the pandemic.
Leading experts have raised concerns about the reliability, cost and clinical use of the coronavirus antibody testing kits.
Covid-19 antibody tests are designed to tell whether a person has had the illness in the past.
The first phase of the Government's antibody testing programme is set to assess the NHS and care staff.
Coronavirus: NHS Test and Trace figures due as PM defends system
'People will have to self-declare' if they are at risk of coronavirus, Matt Hancock says of Test and Trace app
Clinicians will be able to request tests for patients in both hospital and social care settings.
But a letter from academics and clinicians, published in the BMJ, raises concerns about the performance of the tests, the clinical reasoning and their cost.
Coronavirus antibody tests have been sold in Superdrug for up to £69, but other private clinics are offering tests from as much as £110 or more.
A team of academics wrote: We are writing to express concerns over aspects of the establishment of SARS-CoV-2 antibody testing in England.
NHS England and NHS Improvement wrote to NHS trusts and pathology networks on 25 May 2020, asking them to offer antibody testing at short notice and ramp up capacity to thousands of samples a day.
We have three concerns about the request. Firstly, there is no specific clinical indication for the test on an individual basis.
"Secondly, the performance of these assays has not yet been assessed to the standard typically required of a novel test. And thirdly, the resource implications are not considered."
They added the result of the test, whether positive of negative, would not change the treatment they are receiving and a positive result "does not indicate immunity".
They also dismissed the concept of "immunity passports" and said those who had tested positive on the antibody tests should still be cautious of being reinfected.
They raised concerns about the "unproven performance" of the tests" and the "unprecedented pace and scale" they had been rolled out without "adequate assessment".
The Government website states: While the results of an antibody test will not allow people to make any changes to their behaviour, such as easing social distancing measures, there's clear value in knowing whether NHS and care workers and hospital patients and care home residents have had the virus, and in collecting data on the test results.
A spokesman for Roche Diagnostics UK told The BMJ: We are rolling out antibody tests to the NHS as part of the crucial next step in understanding the spread of this virus, and providing greater confidence and reassurance as we move into the next phase of our response to this pandemic.
A Public Health England spokesman said: Our evaluations have been completed in record time using the samples and tests that were available to us. We are confident that the volume of samples and methodology was of a high standard.
In a statement to The BMJ, the Department of Health and Social Care said: We do not currently know how long an antibody response to the virus lasts, nor whether having antibodies means a person cannot transmit it to others.
But the spokesman reiterated that antibody testing will play an increasingly important role as we move into the next phase of our response to this pandemic.
Coronavirus: Everything you need to know
Check the number of cases in your area with our interactive map
Listen and subscribe to our podcast
All the coronavirus information you need in one place - from health and work to what you can do to stop the spread of the virus
Additional Covid-19 support for Kirklees has been scaled back after coronavirus rates in the borough stabilised.
The rate in Kirklees is 118 people per 100,000 which is similar to the national average of 101 per 100,000, meaning that surge testing and guidance of taking caution when meeting people and not travelling out of the area will no longer apply.
There were no deaths in the District last week and 14 people were admitted to hospital, down from 21 the week before.
Pop-up vaccination clinics in Kirklees will remain open for anyone aged 18 or over, 268,000 people have had at least one jab according to the council.
Rachel Spencer-Henshall, Strategic Director for Public Health at Kirklees Council, said: "Our infection rate hasn't changed a lot in the last week but it is now close to the national and regional averages. It is still high though, so we need to bring it down.
"Thanks to the efforts of local people, we have slowed down the spread of Covid-19 in Kirklees and Government has announced guidance on taking particular caution when meeting anyone outside your household or support bubble and minimising travel in and out of the affected areas will no longer apply in Kirklees
"Thankfully, we've had no deaths related to the virus in the last week in local hospitals and that's exactly how we want to keep it.
"With a lot of restrictions now eased in line with the national roadmap, we have to make sure we don't see our number of hospital admissions and deaths rise. Bringing down our infection rates is one way we can do this and the other is to take the vaccine."
People are still being encouraged to take lateral flow tests twice a week and to book a PCR test if they have symptoms.
