The cost of NHS coronavirus tests for international travel are being reduced from £88 to £68 each from today, the government has announced.
Passengers returning from green list countries, or amber list destinations if they are fully vaccinated, will now pay £20 less per PCR test. The test must be taken on or before day two after the traveller arrives in England.
People who have not had both doses of the coronavirus vaccine and are returning from amber list countries will also see the price of the two tests they need fall from £170 to £136. The tests must be taken on days two and eight of their arrival from abroad.
The price reduction does not affect arrivals from red list countries, or if they purchase a test from a private provider, the Department of Health and Social Care said.
NHS Test and Trace provide COVID tests for international travel, but unlike normal lateral flow tests (LFT) or PCR ones for people with symptoms, they are paid for.
The travel industry, which has been hammered by the pandemic, has long complained that the costs of tests are too high.
Health Secretary Sajid Javid has announced a "rapid internal review" of prices charged by government-approved companies after claims holidaymakers are being exploited over private testing.
"I've ordered my department to urgently review the list of private providers on gov.uk to ensure pricing is clearer and transparent," he said on Saturday.
"Any provider found to be misleading the public will be kicked off.
"Too many providers are acting like cowboys and that needs to stop. The public should be allowed to enjoy their summer holidays without having to face excessive costs or anxiety."
Mr Javid has also commissioned a wider review by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) to address discrepancies in testing prices.
The competition regulator will soon feed back on whether forcing people to pay for travel tests is in line with competition law.
The health secretary has asked the competition watchdog to investigate the market for PCR tests amid concerns of "exploitative practices" and vastly different costs.
Sajid Javid wrote to the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) requesting a "rapid high-level" review to protect travellers as the prime minister came under further pressure to cap the cost of private COVID tests.
PCR tests, which use a swab to detect coronavirus on the tonsils and inside the nose, typically cost around £75.
However, travellers have complained of significant price differences and levels of service from the more than 400 firms which offer the tests.
"The cost of PCR testing can act as a barrier, especially for families who want to travel together," Mr Javid said in his letter to CMA chief executive Andrea Coscelli.
"It is not right if some families experience yet further disruption unnecessarily because of practices in the market for private travel tests."
The letter continued: "It is for these reasons that I am writing to you to ask you to conduct a rapid high-level review of the market for PCR travel tests to assess what action might be taken to ensure that consumers do not face unnecessarily high costs or other poor provision."
He asked the CMA for immediate advice on how to "stamp out any exploitative behaviour in this market" ahead of an investigation and urged the watchdog to "take action to prevent such exploitation where you can under your existing powers".
The health secretary also tweeted: "People should be able to go on holiday, whether it's to see family or just to relax, without fearing excessive fees for PCR tests."
A CMA spokesperson told Sky News: "We are aware of concerns about the evolving markets for COVID-19 tests for international travellers.
"We look forward to providing the Secretary of State with advice on how best to ensure that travellers have access to tests that are affordable and reliable."
A list of companies and clinics offering COVID testing is published by the government, but many reportedly lack full accreditation and more than 100 outlets are charging £200 or more.
Analysis of the list by the Liberal Democrats shows just 11% of the providers offered tests for under £50, with the cheapest offering prices ranging from £20.
Some 24% of the providers were charging more than £200 - with the Mayfair GP clinic listed as £575, although its own website said prices start at £399.
Follow the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker.
Lib Dem health spokeswoman Munira Wilson said: "International travel cannot become a luxury that only the wealthy can afford."
"Testing is vital in our fight against the pandemic, but if it is safe to travel it should be affordable to travel," she added.
"The Liberal Democrats are calling on the Government to cap the cost of PCR tests for international travel, scrap the VAT on tests and cut the red tape that is keeping prices high."
The cost of COVID-19 tests for holidaymakers should be cut to £30 to encourage people to start travelling again, a boss at one of Britain's biggest travel chains has told Sky News.
Jonathan Woodall, chief operating officer at Hays Travel, said that the current price of up to £200 for PCR tests was too high and will be a "barrier for customers" as restrictions ease next month.
He said the government should help bring the cost down.
Live COVID updates from the UK and around the world
Under a traffic light system for the hoped-for resumption of foreign holidays from 17 May, even those returning from "green" low-risk countries will have to pay to have the tests.
But industry figures including easyJet boss Johan Lundgren have said that the rule threatens to price ordinary travellers out of returning to the skies.
Speaking to Sky's Ian King Live, Mr Woodall said the cost of the tests would "cause a barrier" - especially for families looking at total bills of around £600 for the tests.
"We are hoping that government will help us get those tests reduced," he added.
Mr Woodall said there had already been some signs of providers cutting prices - after testing firm Randox said earlier this week that it was reducing the cost for customers flying with its partner airlines from £120 to £60.
"Hopefully we'll continue to see that and we've still got some time to work with government and also the providers," he said.
"From our point of view we would like to see that price to be around £30, we think that would be acceptable.
"At the minute you see some of the tests are ranging from £85 up to £200. I think that would definitely be a barrier for customers.
"It's important that we can get our industry back to some normality, it's important the customers can start to travel.
"The pandemic has affected many people in different ways and customers are looking for a holiday and we're definitely seeing that and especially since we opened our shops this week.
"We've got to play our part and do the right thing for our customers and also for the industry."
Mr Woodall told Sky News that the reopening of non-essential retailers as COVID-19 restrictions were eased this week had seen queues outside stores.
Much of the demand has been for holidays later this year and into next, he said, though there had also been many customers who had postponed travel from last year to this and would hope to be travelling from next month.
There had also been significant sales for domestic cruises around the UK, Mr Woodall added.
He said the company was closely watching for any update on which country would be on the green list for travel, expecting Malta and Portugal to be included.
Mr Woodall also said he was "hopeful" of Spain being on the green list and that he expected Greece would be on it.
It comes after easyJet's boss earlier this week said he believed all Europe's major destinations would be on the government's low-risk list when it is revealed early in May.
The chief executive of easyJet has warned that foreign holidays risk becoming the preserve of those with expendable income , as the industry eagerly awaits news on when international travel can restart.
Johan Lundgren told Sky News that a planned traffic light system for destinations, which will demand pre-departure and post-arrival COVID-19 tests for passengers, would pile costs on travellers.
The measures were outlined on Monday as the government works towards a planned restart for holidays from 17 May, under the PM's roadmap for England.
However, Boris Johnson was only able to tell reporters that he hoped that would be the case, as a review was ongoing.
There remain real concerns that with a third wave of infections in Europe a push to resume holidays could import cases and new variants.
Under the planned traffic light system, assessments on where is deemed safe will be based on a range of factors, including the proportion of a country's population to have been vaccinated.
While those returning from countries rated "green" will not be required to self-isolate, coronavirus tests will still be needed before leaving and on arrival.
The recommended PCR tests would cost up to £200 per person.
Test results may yet fall into a so-called vaccine passport regime, which is still being considered for trips both abroad and even at home.
The government's advice is that no one should be booking foreign travel just yet, despite operators reporting a surge in demand following a year of misery for the sector that has cost tens of thousands of jobs.
Mr Lundgren told Ian King Live he remained hopeful of a strong summer ahead, if measures to control the spread of coronavirus allowed, and was confident of more details soon on a restart from 17 May.
But he said of the planned traffic light system: "If you are categorised as a 'green country'... there should be no restrictions at all really because what I'm afraid about is that if the government are now adding cost complexity, even if you are in the 'green' bucket, that's going to make it out of reach for many families if you look at what the cost would be.
"If, for instance, you needed to do a PCR test you wouldn't open up international travel for everyone, you would open up for those who can afford to pay that."
Rory Boland, Editor of Which? Travel, responded: "Testing will be essential for restarting travel safely, but private tests in the UK are currently too expensive and risk pricing most people out of travel.
"Other countries have found solutions to reduce the cost of private testing, so if the government is serious about making travel safe and affordable when it restarts, it must urgently look at ways to reduce these expenses."
There was general disappointment across the industry that the PM could not give greater certainty over the reopening date and rules.
Heathrow chief executive John Holland-Kaye said: "Now that a safe, scientifically-backed process has been agreed upon, a clearer timeline for the return to international travel is needed."
Travellers reporting a failure to receive expensive COVID testing kits or results from private providers has raised fears that the UK's current system for managing airport arrivals is not fit for purpose.
People arriving in the UK, from countries that are not on the "red list", currently have to quarantine for 10 days and pay for PCR COVID tests to be taken on day two and day eight to be allowed to leave self-isolation.
The government has a list of providers travellers can purchase the tests from, with companies providing a reference number to be able to board the flight and then sending them the tests at home, with results being emailed.
The providers self-declare they meet the standards, and there are also a limited number of laboratories that can process the tests, which are also testing for variants.
But hundreds of people have reported that the tests have either never arrived, arrived late, or their results have not been returned - and some say companies are refusing to refund them for the tests that cost around £200.
A Facebook group of people complaining about these issues has grown to 1,700 over the past few weeks, with concerns that if this is not sorted ahead of 17 May - the earliest that people in the UK will be allowed to go on foreign holidays - the problem could be much bigger.
There are already "deep concerns" from Heathrow's chief executive John Holland-Kaye that the Home Office and UK Border Force are ill-prepared for more airport traffic - and he has warned them to "get a grip" on the checks or change the system ahead of that date.
Agnes Kegl, from Maidenhead, bought tests for her and her son, Aron, for £400, when they returned from Hungary for her work - but did not receive a test kit until 13 days after she arrived in the UK.
She had to purchase more tests from another provider - another £400 - so she could leave quarantine after the NHS COVID helpline responder said she would have to quarantine until she got the tests and negative results.
The government then clarified people could leave quarantine after 14 days without results.
Ms Kegl had to get her bank involved to eventually receive a refund, although it was only £120, after the provider first did not reply and then sent a few different emails saying she would be refunded within different time frames - but it never came.
After she had purchased the tests, the provider she used, which was only set up in November, was taken off the government list with no explanation.
She told Sky News: "It was frustrating and I felt they were trying to monetise COVID - I was in a Catch-22 with having to go back to work but not being able to leave quarantine."
Meanwhile, Olga Harrison, from Canterbury, purchased the £380 tests for her and her son's return from Russia but nothing has ever arrived.
She told Sky News: "We had many calls from track and trace asking for our results but we didn't have the tests and the NHS sent an email saying if nothing arrives, then you can be released from quarantine after the 10th day.
"I was shocked and it made me not believe in the system as it seemed that it wasn't about the variants, it was like a travel test.
"I was worried we were free to go without any tests because my son's dad is over 60 and his grandparents are elderly."
Ms Harrison asked for a refund many times but they would not, and eventually HSBC gave her a 'charge back'.
"I would expect this in a dictatorship, in countries like Russia where I come from, but I never thought this could happen here - nothing is going to happen to these companies," she said.
The government has said it "does not endorse or recommend any test provider" and people should do their own research on the providers.
Some laboratories Sky News spoke to blamed Royal Mail and said some people were not returning the tests properly, or only wanted to pay for the reference number to board their flight and not so they could do the tests - although they have to purchase them as a package.
Royal Mail told Sky News it has urged providers to use its tracked service, "although this is not always the case", and said it services hundreds of thousands of test kits for the NHS every day "both speedily and efficiently".
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps announced on Thursday that the price of "government-approved commercial PCR tests for travel" will be reduced, with some companies charging as little as £44.90 for one test.
A government spokesman said: "We are carefully monitoring issues raised by the public, raising every complaint with private test providers.
"We also monitor all providers' performance, including their delivery and test turnaround times.
"We will take rapid action against any company that is providing an inadequate service."
All travellers arriving in the UK are to face mandatory coronavirus tests - paid for by themselves - from next week, Health Secretary Matt Hancock is poised to announce to MPs.
In a Commons statement, Mr Hancock will say that from next Monday, 15 February, all passengers arriving in the UK will be required to take a PCR test, which currently cost around £100 per test, on days two and eight after they arrive.
The new rules, which will cause further dismay in the already-reeling airline industry, will apply to arrivals not just from 33 so-called Red Zone countries heading into hotel quarantine, but also those isolating at home.
At present, people travelling to the UK are required to provide proof of a negative coronavirus test taken no more than 72 hours before they enter the country.
But scientists from the government's SAGE group have advised ministers that this pre-departure testing can make only a limited contribution to stopping people with coronavirus entering the UK.
The testing crackdown, aimed at stopping the spread of deadly new variants into the UK, is part of the government's long-awaited borders plan, including mandatory quarantine in hotels for Red Zone arrivals.
Under the new regime, the COVID-19 tests taken on day two will be sent for analysis to identify new strains of coronavirus. Anyone who fails to get tested will face fines, and travellers will have to pay for their tests.
It will bring the UK into line with countries including Italy, Canada and Dubai, where tests on arrival are mandatory. In most cases, testing takes place at the airport.
Environment Secretary George Eustice told Sky News that Mr Hancock "may be looking at this further today".
"I don't think a final decision has been made on that, but we do keep all of this under review," he said.
"We've stopped short of having a total closure of the border at this stage. We actually think that it causes a lot of disruption but doesn't add a huge amount."
He added: "There is a case for doing some testing during quarantine, we already have a provision so they can test to release during quarantine earlier.
"We're obviously looking at this to see if we can strengthen these measures further."
Subscribe to the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
Ahead of Mr Hancock's Commons statement, a health department spokesperson told Sky News: "Throughout the pandemic, the government has put in place proportionate measures, informed by the advice of scientists, that have led to some of the toughest border regimes in the world.
"It is important the government continues to take the necessary steps to protect people and save lives.
"Enhancing our testing regime to cover all arrivals while they isolate will provide a further level of protection and enable us to better track any new cases which might be brought into the country, and give us even more opportunities to detect new variants.
"Further details of our mandatory quarantine and enhanced testing regime will be set out soon."
But the government was criticised by Labour's shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, who tweeted: "Yet again the UK government is lurching from one crisis to another, with no consistent strategy to secure our borders against COVID variants."
He added: "21,000 people are entering the country every day. We need a comprehensive hotel quarantine system urgently."
Mr Hancock is making the government announcement after Downing Street announced last Thursday that Boris Johnson had appointed him "to oversee cross-government efforts to deliver mandatory quarantine and enhanced testing which will help tackle the threats of new variants of COVID-19".
In what looked like a side-lining of Home Secretary Priti Patel, Number 10 added: "A new cabinet sub-committee, led by the health and care secretary, will be attended by a number of senior cabinet ministers that will play a vital role in delivering the policy.
"The government is also working closely with the devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland as the changes come into effect."
But during Home Office questions in the Commons on the eve of Mr Hancock's statement, Ms Patel told MPs: "The new health measures at the border are necessary to protect public health and our world-class vaccination programme.
"The government have been very clear about measures that will be announced - some in due course - because a lot of operational and logistical planning is taking place around these measures.
"At the same time, it is worth recognising that there are many people on the frontline looking at the implementation of this policy, which is based on the advice of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies and other government advisers.
"It is important that we take time to absolutely make sure that these measures are put in place in the right way."
Over three nights Sky News will host a series of special programmes examining the UK's response to the pandemic.
Watch COVID Crisis: Learning the Lessons at 8pm on 9, 10 and 11 February.
COVID-19 testing is becoming more common in the UK as, along with mass vaccinations, it helps to open up society at a time when restrictions are easing.
A university is trialling the use of saliva samples to test for coronavirus - a move researchers claim could be "transformative" for screening large numbers of people and cuts the risk of community transmission.
Scientists behind the pilot TestEd scheme at the University of Edinburgh said it is potentially more accurate, less invasive and cheaper than current tests.
The tests use a saliva sample in a tube which undergoes hypercube sample pooling to allow dozens of samples to be PCR-tested simultaneously.
At the moment, anyone can order a free PCR test kit in the post from the government if they have coronavirus symptoms, and alternatively they can get rapid lateral flow tests if they don't have symptoms.
There are also walk-in and drive-through sites available, as well as surge testing which is taking place in certain areas with high case rates.
Secondary school children are being tested at home twice a week with lateral flow tests to keep COVID-19 out of classrooms.
And, many people leaving the UK need to take a pre-departure test, while those coming back must have proof of a negative test on arrival, and are required to have further testing in the UK.
Some sports fans also have to get tested before they have access to certain events.
So, what are lateral flow tests?
Sky News has looked at the different types of COVID tests available.
There are two different strands of testing - one is to find out if a person currently has the disease, and the other determines if they have had it and have built up antibodies.
PCR testing and antigen testing (often confused as the same kind of test) are different methods of testing, but both ascertain whether a person has COVID-19 at the time.
PCR testing
Swab testing
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is currently the most common form of testing in the UK and is seen as fairly reliable.
Lighthouse Labs, which are dedicated to COVID-19 testing, found PCR tests are around 99% effective.
These types of tests have been used by the NHS in their testing centres around the country for the past few months and are the tests sent out by the NHS to people who have symptoms.
For PCR tests, a swab is used to collect an RNA sample (the nucleic acid that converts DNA into proteins) from the patient's tonsils and inside their nose.
RNA is collected as it carries the genetic information of this specific virus.
This is then sent to a laboratory where the sample is heated and cooled so it multiplies into larger quantities of DNA.
Bioscientists can then see whether the SARS-CoV-2 virus (the virus that causes COVID-19) is present.
Because of the process, PCR test results take about two days.
LAMP testing
Loop-mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) is a similar process to PCR testing but produces many more viral RNA copies at a constant temperature instead of heating and cooling so can have a result much quicker - within a couple of hours or even faster.
A swab is used to take samples from the nose or throat, or mucus from hard coughing can also be used. The swabbing does not need to be as vigorous as it is for the PCR test.
The samples are then placed in vials of reagents (substances that produce a chemical reaction to detect the RNA), then heated in a special machine for 20 minutes.
The machine then analyses the sample and confirms if there is any SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
LAMP technology has been used to test NHS staff in Liverpool as part of a pilot in the city to "inform a blueprint for how mass testing can be achieved and how fast and reliable COVID-19 testing can be delivered at scale", the Department of Health and Social Care said.
In mid-September, LAMP testing was part of a £500m funding boost after a successful pilot across Hampshire hospitals, GP test hubs and care homes.
90-minute PCR test
Machines that can deliver on-the-spot genetic testing are being used to collect RNA for PCR testing, which can also detect the common flu.
The RNA, taken using swab samples placed into a cartridge, is inserted into the machine which carries out a PCR test and then identifies if the virus is present.
A successful pilot test across eight London hospitals using British start-up DnaNudge's machines is being rolled out to urgent NHS patient care and elective surgery settings UK-wide, plus out of hospital settings, with the plan to deliver 5.8 million tests.
No-swab saliva test
Patients can do this test at home by collecting about two millimetres of saliva into a sample pot, then sending it off to a laboratory.
The sample gets tested using LAMP technology in a lab and the result is then texted to the person.
It still takes about 48 hours but there is no need for a patient to leave their home or stick a swab down their throat or up their nose.
A government-funded trial in Southampton was expanded from GPs to the city's university staff and students, and four schools.
Antigen testing
These tests look for antigens - proteins on the surface of the virus.
Antigens can easily be detected in saliva and laboratory testing is not necessary, so can be done in places such as care homes and without a medical professional.
Results can be provided more quickly than PCR tests, with some systems already available and dozens more being developed.
However, an ongoing review of one antigen COVID test found that sensitivity dropped when done by members of the public instead of healthcare staff - meaning there is a higher chance of false negatives when the tests are used by self-trained users until they develop more experience.
The preliminary report from the joint PHE Porton Down and University of Oxford SARS-CoV-2 test development and validation cell found the sensitivity of the "Innova SARS-CoV-2 Antigen Rapid Qualitative Test" dropped from 79% when used by laboratory scientists compared to 73% when used by trained healthcare staff compared to 58% when used by self-trained members of the public.
Lateral flow testing
These tests are designed to identify asymptomatic people and have been used across England after a pilot in Liverpool.
It uses similar technology to a pregnancy test.
A swab is inserted into the nose or throat, then the sample is inserted into a tube of liquid for a short time which extracts the molecule that determines if COVID-19 is present.
No laboratory equipment is needed as a few drops of liquid are then dropped onto a small strip.
Within 15 minutes, the strip of paper will show up with two lines if it is positive, one line on the top if it is negative or one line on the bottom if the test is invalid.
While the test result returns very quickly, there are questions over its sensitivity, with initial tests by PHE Porton Down and the University of Oxford of the Innova lateral flow test being used in Liverpool finding 76.8% sensitivity - the proportion of people with COVID-19 who show up positive.
The team also found the Innova test had a specificity - the proportion of people without the disease who have a negative test - of 99.68%, meaning the false positive rate was 0.32%.
However, they found it detects more than 95% of people with high viral loads, with little difference between those who are symptomatic and asymptomatic.
SAGE, the government's scientific advisory group, warned that with mass testing, false positives and false negatives could have "critical implications" for effectiveness, therefore a follow-up confirmatory test is highly important.
20-second test
Released in September, the Virolens system uses a portable machine which creates a microscopic holographic image to detect the virus in saliva samples in 20 seconds.
Developed by British companies iAbra and TT Electronics, it uses a digital camera attached to a microscope, which then runs data through a computer that can identify the virus from other cells.
The device has been trialled at Heathrow Airport, whose chief executive, John Holland-Kaye, has urged the government to fast-track the technology to be used across the UK.
Antibody testing
Antibody testing looks at whether your body has produced any antibodies to fight against the virus.
A blood test is taken from a person who has had COVID-19 symptoms that have disappeared three to four weeks before.
A lab test then takes a unique protein the virus makes and tests whether any antibodies in the blood bind to that protein.
There are pin-prick tests in development which would allow a person to submit their own blood test, but these have not been rolled out yet.
Unlike other diseases, the UK government and the World Health Organisation agree there is currently no evidence that someone with antibodies will not catch COVID-19 again in the future.
A study by Imperial College found the levels of protective antibodies in people who have had COVID-19 drop "quite rapidly".
Another study found T-cells, which attack the infected cells, were lasting longer than antibodies - six months after infection.
Falling COVID case rates could be due to children and young people no longer being tested at school, as opposed to an easing of the pandemic.
This could impact the modelling being carried out by scientists in the next few months, as they prepare and advise on what could happen when winter arrives.
New documents from the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group (SPI-M-O) of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies highlighted the potential issue with falling numbers.
During term time, secondary and college age pupils took two tests a week. But this will not be mandated over the summer months.
Young people have seen some of the highest rates of infections in the recent parts of the pandemic.
The latest SPI-M-O document states: "The closure of schools for summer holidays is likely to reduce transmission overall but will also reduce an important surveillance data stream from lateral flow testing."
It comes after the Office for National Statistics showed an estimated increase in coronavirus infections - in comparison to the government dashboard, which signalled a trend in the other direction.
The ONS estimate is built on random testing of the population, as opposed to the government's reliance on people who are taking tests proactively - including those worried they are infected, children, and people who require a negative test for travel or work.
In the week to 24 July, the ONS estimated that 952,000 people in the UK were infected with COVID-19 - a rise of more than 14% on the previous week.
Meanwhile, the government dashboard - which has been showing slowing infection rates - reported a 14.4% decrease in the number of tests being carried out.
State schools in England and Wales broke up around 22 July, while independent schools finished a week or two earlier.
The drop in testing during the holidays can be seen in the May half-term and the Easter break.
For the seven days from 29 May, the start of half-term, an average of 673,229 tests were carried out per day.
In the week preceding the break, there were an average of 874,845 tests per day, and 879,193 the week after - signalling a drop of around 25% during the week off.
A similar fall was seen over the Easter holidays.
While this slowing in testing could explain the current drop in the infection rate, going forward it could signal problems for those looking to model the path the pandemic could take.
Dr Simon Clarke, the head of biomedical sciences & biomedical engineering at the University of Reading said: "Without school testing, we will see a significant underreporting of the scale of infection in wider society.
"This will certainly make modelling the infection into the winter and the flu season virtually impossible, with any accuracy."
However, he caveated his statement by saying that, due to children being a "significant reservoir" for the virus, the breaking up of school will also help ease infections in some way.
The SPI-M-O document warned that "September and October 2021 will be a particularly risky point in the trajectory of the epidemic".
Follow the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
"It is likely behaviours will take time to return to more normal levels and, if this coincides with the return of schools and universities in the autumn, significant pressures on healthcare could be seen."
It added that there is a possibility of a "period of unpredictable epidemics" of other winter diseases, which saw limited transmission due to the coronavirus restrictions last year.
Boris Johnson has been told to "get a grip" of his coronavirus quarantine policy as Heathrow Airport pushes for the 14-day isolation period to be shortened.
The travel hub's chief executive told Sky News the prime minister needs to act swiftly to stop "holding back the recovery of the UK economy" due to the restrictions on many travellers arriving in the country.
The airport has revealed plans for a new testing facility which it hopes will lead to the end of the two-week mandatory quarantine for those returning from countries removed from the UK's safe list.
Arriving passengers will be able to book coronavirus swab tests and have results sent to them within seven hours.
Those testing negative could leave quarantine five to eight days after landing.
Heathrow said it has been working with aviation services company Collinson and logistics firm Swissport on a testing facility which is now "ready for use", adding that the positive economic impact would be "significant".
More than 13,000 passenger tests can be carried out each day, which can be further scaled with demand.
The pilot of the new testing procedure could be available as a private service to anyone with a flight landing at Terminal 2, and within a few weeks for those arriving at Terminal 5, it said.
The COVID-19 tests, which are identical to the swabs used by the NHS, would be booked online and cost £150. It is hoped this could fall to £50 a passenger - with a state subsidy.
Travellers can then do a second test at home a few days later and leave quarantine early if they pass both checks.
Similar double-testing schemes are being used in several other countries, including Germany and Iceland.
But the proposal needs government approval before it can begin in the UK.
Heathrow Airport CEO John Holland-Kaye said on Wednesday that "having started well" by introducing different policies for travellers coming from different countries based on risk, the UK has "now fallen behind".
"We need to move quickly to get people moving through the UK again to help us to recover the UK economy," he told Ian King Live.
"This is a cross-government decision, and this is a question for Number 10 to get a grip of our border policy to make sure that business can start flowing again...
"This is holding back the recovery of the UK economy and putting thousands and thousands of jobs at risk.
"The government needs to act now to allow testing as an alternative to quarantine so we can get the economy kick-started."
Health Secretary Matt Hancock confirmed ministers are thrashing out details on the feasibility of such a regime.
He told Sky News: "We are working with Heathrow and other airports on this project.
"The challenge is - because the virus can incubate inside your body without coming forward and without therefore a test being positive even if you've got it - the challenge is how to do that testing in a way that we can have confidence enough to release the quarantine.
"It is absolutely a project that we are working with Heathrow on.
"I clearly understand the impact of quarantine on so many people's lives. It is not something anybody would want to do.
"So I hope that this project can bear fruit."
A Heathrow spokesman last week accused the government of playing "quarantine roulette" after a surge of coronavirus cases in France and other countries saw ministers suddenly remove them from the UK's travel corridor list, sparking a mass exodus as tens of thousands of British tourists rushed back home.
Documents released on Friday from the government's advice group known as SAGE show a meeting on 18 June found "double testing of travellers significantly reduces the risk of false negatives and could enable quarantine duration of less than 14 days".
Analysis published by the Office for National Statistics on Tuesday found that only around 28% of people testing positive for COVID-19 reported any evidence of symptoms at the time of their swab test, or at either the preceding or subsequent tests.
The remaining 72% of positive cases either did not report having any of the specific or general symptoms on the day of their positive swab test, preceding or subsequent swab tests, or did not answer both questions, the ONS added.
It said the findings suggested there was a "potentially large number" of asymptomatic cases.
Former Labour prime minister Tony Blair has also called for much wider testing to try to trace and control the virus given "we're not going to be able to eradicate this disease".
He told Sky News on Wednesday that airport testing "would give you a much, much better way of avoiding the strictness of the lockdown and the quarantine rules that are going to do so much damage to business".
Heathrow Airport is proposing a regime of testing in a bid to reduce 14-day quarantines and get people travelling as the travel sector suffers under the strain of the coronavirus crisis.
Its chief executive John Holland-Kaye called on the government to grant a scheme whereby passengers would be tested for COVID-19 at their point of entry to the UK - and again at a health centre within five to eight days.
He argued that such a programme would boost passenger confidence following fright over the sudden implementation at the weekend of a 14-day quarantine for people arriving from Spain.
It stoked worries among travellers over the potential for lost earnings under enforced, precautionary lockdowns.
Asked for his response to Heathrow's idea on Sky's Kay Burley@Breakfast, culture secretary Oliver Dowden said the government was reviewing all options because it wanted to minimise disruption but described testing as no "silver bullet".
He admitted more countries could be added to the UK's quarantine list if infection rates "run out of control" in them.
Mr Holland-Kaye acknowledged there would be a cost to passengers, under Heathrow's proposals, of around £150 per person for the airport-based test but said he hoped that burden would come down as time went on and be attractive to people who wanted to limit their time in isolation.
Heathrow issued the plea for the government to work with the industry on the issue as it reported almost half a billion pounds of losses during the first half of the year.
Its CEO said: "The UK needs a passenger testing regime and fast. Without it, Britain is just playing a game of quarantine roulette.
"Our European competitors are racing ahead with passenger testing, if the UK doesn't act soon global Britain will be nothing more than a campaign slogan," he added.
In an interview with Sky News, Mr Holland-Kaye said he could not criticise the government for its response but called for a partnership to helping testing become a reality.
He told Ian King Live: "We pushed the button over the weekend on setting up a testing facility in Terminal Two - we could have it up and running within the next two weeks.
"What we need though is for the government to work with us on this. We need them to allow people out of quarantine if they have tested clear at both of those testing points.
"We need them to work with us on making sure we tie in to their track and trace system and I'm sure there will be some other changes we need to make to fit in with government policy.
"This is an opportunity for government and the private sector to work together to save the economy but also prevent a second wave of COVID."
A traffic light system that will categorise countries based on their COVID-19 risk levels is part of plans to safely restart foreign holidays.
The approach has been recommended by the government's Global Travel Taskforce, which has been working on how all international travel can resume since the publication of Boris Johnson's roadmap for lifting lockdown restrictions.
Under the prime minister's roadmap, foreign travel - apart from the limited current exemptions - will not be allowed any earlier than 17 May.
Here is how the traffic light system will work:
Green countries
People arriving in the UK from "green list" countries will need to take a pre-departure test in that country
On or before the second day after arriving in the UK, they will need to take a PCR test purchased from a private provider, which costs around £120
They will not need to quarantine on their return unless they receive a positive test
Test packages must be booked and paid for before travelling from a list of government-approved providers.
Amber countries
People arriving from "amber list" countries will have to quarantine for 10 days at home (day zero is the day you arrive)
They will have to take a pre-departure test, then a PCR test on days two and eight, bought from a private provider
Travellers will be given a unique reference number after buying the tests that they have to put on their passenger locator form before they travel to the UK
There will be an option for "test to release" in which they can end self-isolation early if they test negative on day five, as well as day two, by purchasing an extra PCR test
Test packages must be booked and paid for before travelling from a list of government-approved providers.
Red countries
Arrivals from the "red list" will have to quarantine for 10 days in a specific quarantine hotel at a cost of £1,750
They will have to take a pre-departure test then PCR tests on day two and day eight
Passengers must book and agree to pay for a quarantine package before departing for the UK.
Green watchlist
This will identify countries most at risk of moving from green to amber so travellers have some warning
However, the government "will not hesitate to act immediately should the data show that countries' risk ratings have changed".
How the list will be decided
Countries in each category will be kept under review and the government will respond to data, focusing on variants of concern
Vaccination rates, infection rates, the prevalence of variants, a country's genomic sequencing capacity and access to reliable scientific information will be taken into account
The restrictions will be formally reviewed on 28 June to see whether the measures could be relaxed, followed by reviews "no later than 31 July and 1 October".
What the government is still looking into
Ministers have said they will work with the travel industry and private test providers to "drive down costs" of foreign travel "while ensuring it is as safe as possible"
This could include eliminating the need for more expensive PCR tests for when passengers return home and replacing them with rapid, Lateral Flow ones (LFTs), which the government could provide for free
Passengers could also be given free packs of rapid tests, like the ones currently being offered by some pharmacies, local authorities and by post, before they leave the country to do on their return
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps has confirmed to Sky News that an NHS app will be used as a COVID passport for travel abroad. This will allow Britons to demonstrate whether they have had a COVID jab, or tested negative for the virus, if they are required to do so when arriving in other countries.
Passenger locator forms
The form - where arrivals must fill in their travel details, UK address, passport details, COVID test booking reference numbers and quarantine hotel invoice (if needed) - will be digitised "by autumn 2021"
Stricter rules for airlines breaching consumer rights
The Civil Aviation Authority will be given additional enforcement power to act on airlines that have breached consumer rights
A COVID-19 charter will be introduced from 17 May, setting out what is required of passengers and what their rights are while the measures are in place.
Infection rates have continued to rise across England, Wales and Northern Ireland - but dropped in Scotland, according to the latest estimates.
Data from the Office for National Statistics shows that in the week ending 24 July, approximately one in 65 people were estimated to have had COVID-19 in England.
The rate was around one in 65 people in Northern Ireland, and around one in 160 Wales.
Meanwhile, the percentage of people testing positive in Scotland dropped in that week - around one in 110 people had COVID.
Though England's infection rate went up, there are "possible signs that the rate of increase may have slowed", the ONS said.
The highest percentage of people testing positive for coronavirus in England was in the North East, while infections increased in all regions except for the East of England and the South West.
The percentage of people testing positive has increased for those aged two to 16, and those over 50.
The estimated prevalence of one in 65 in England is up from the one in 75 reported for the previous week.
Sky's science correspondent Thomas Moore noted that the government's official dashboard shows the number of tests being done in the UK fell by 14.4% in the week leading up to 24 July.
Professor Stephen Reicher from the University of St Andrews noted that data from the ZOE app, which uses analysis provided by King's College London, suggests that infections haven't fallen and remain at about 60,000 per day.
He also questioned whether testing behaviour is changing now we are told "infections don't matter?"
Prime Minister Boris Johnson has lifted the last COVID restrictions in England in spite of the pre-dominance of the highly-transmissible Delta variant which concerns scientists globally.
Cases rose steeply in the run-up to the end of legal coronavirus restrictions in England on 19 July, and Health Secretary Sajid Javid said cases could hit 100,000 a day after the unlocking.
Instead, the number of new cases recorded each day started to fall.
The average number of new infections in the UK has fallen over the past week, which might suggest the third wave of coronavirus has peaked.
But the latest ONS figures, suggesting cases are continuing to rise in most parts of the UK, mean it is too soon to say that the peak has definitely passed.
Epidemiologists have said that the end of the Euro 2020 football tournament and school summer holidays might have helped reduce the spread of the virus, as well as cautious behaviour in the population.
Follow the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
They also say the impact of the 19 July unlocking, which saw nightclubs reopening and the end of social distancing requirements, will take a while to filter through to the data.
Daily reported cases fell for seven straight days to a low of 23,511, but have risen on each of the last two days.
Travellers risk being left "at the mercy of rogue operators" after an investigation highlighted "serious problems" with the government's list of coronavirus test providers.
Consumer group Which? found a number of the tests listed online turned out to be much more expensive than their listings suggested, while others were unobtainable.
People arriving in the UK from a country in the amber tier under the traffic light system are required to have pre-booked two post-arrival PCR tests to be taken on days two and eight.
Analysis of the three cheapest listings on 25 May found prices ranged from £60 to £79.99, but it transpired that those prices related to single tests.
Live COVID updates from the UK and around the world
Which? also found firms listed on the government's website which were not even offering testing services at that time.
The consumer group claimed its investigation demonstrates "serious flaws" with the current system.
Rory Boland, editor of magazine Which? Travel, said: "Weeks on from some international travel being allowed to resume, it's very concerning to still be uncovering such serious problems with the government's testing system for travellers - problems that could have easily been ironed out well ahead of travel restarting, had proper regulatory oversight been ensured early on.
"As it stands, travellers risk being left at the mercy of rogue operators who, at best, attempt to profiteer off of those looking for testing services to allow them to travel, and, at worst, risk leaving them out of pocket for services that don't even exist.
"The government needs to urgently sort out these problems before mass travel resumes, or it will create chaos for travellers who have to rely on the system."
Follow the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
In response, a spokesman for the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said: "Providers who do not meet the minimum standards set by DHSC and reviewed by the independent United Kingdom Accreditation Service, or where our monitoring highlights concerns about their customer service performance, are removed from the gov.uk travel test list.
"Additionally, providers may not appear on the list where they are temporarily out of stock."
There has been widespread criticism of the NHS COVID-19 Test and Trace app from business leaders, but new data analysis suggests it is doing what it is designed to do.
An increasing number of people are being forced to self-isolate after coming in contact with someone with COVID, largely driven by the app. More than 500,000 people were pinged in the week ending 7 July - a 46% increase on the week before.
Businesses have complained that this is causing severe staff shortages and unnecessary chaos, just as the remaining restrictions are lifted in England.
But Sky News analysis of data from NHS Test and Trace suggests that the app is largely effective, with contact tracing alerts keeping pace with rising infections.
While the government initially said it would review the sensitivity of the app, no changes are now expected and people are being urged to keep using it and self-isolate when told.
Professor Jon Crowcroft from the University of Cambridge points out that the app notifications are proportionate to the spread of the virus and the number of people using the app.
"There's nothing much wrong with the app - just people aren't socially distancing enough," he says.
There are fears that the effectiveness of Test and Trace is being undermined by people not checking into venues because they are worried about being told to self-isolate.
The lag in the data means we do not know how the "pingdemic" over the last few weeks has impacted app usage, but data up to the first week in July already points to a fall in the number of check-ins.
More than nine in 10 local authorities in England registered a decline in check-ins in the week ending 7 July compared with the week ending 26 May. This is the first available data after restrictions were eased on 17 May, when indoor hospitality resumed, but before a short-term surge in activity from the half-term holiday.
The drop was most pronounced in areas where infection rates are high, such as the North East and North West. Check-ins declined by more than a quarter over this period in Manchester, Wandsworth and Salford, which all have more than 500 daily cases per 100,000 people.
It is possible that the fall in numbers is because people are visiting public spaces less, not just because they are failing to check-in.
But analysis of Google's mobility index, which aggregates anonymised data from users' location history, suggests that activity has not dropped off.
Footfall at retail and recreation venues increased in all areas except one between mid-May and the first week in June. The data covers just over three-quarters of local authorities in England and Wales.
The NHS Test and Trace Contacts Insights Study, which is based on a relatively small sample of people in England, also suggests a drop in compliance.
The proportion of people that self-reported leaving isolation within the first 24 hours increased from 5% to 9% between the start of March and the first week in July.
Rising infection rates over the summer months could mean an increasing number of people are asked to self-isolate, potentially causing compliance and app usage to fall further.
Experts have warned that the app is a critical tool for controlling the pandemic, especially as other restrictions are lifted and the virus spreads ever more rapidly through the population.
Dr Simon Clarke, an associate professor at the University of Reading, said: "It is a great inconvenience to be asked to stay at home for 10 days, but it is much, much more damaging for people's health and the economy to have a rampant new wave of infections ballooning out of control.
"Self-isolation is one of the most effective tools we have to prevent spread."
Follow the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
The Data and Forensics team is a multi-skilled unit dedicated to providing transparent journalism from Sky News. We gather, analyse and visualise data to tell data-driven stories. We combine traditional reporting skills with advanced analysis of satellite images, social media and other open source information. Through multimedia storytelling we aim to better explain the world while also showing how our journalism is done.
Portugal has confirmed that tourists from the UK will be able to travel to the country from Monday.
The country's foreign affairs minister has said anyone arriving from 17 May must have had a negative PCR result within the previous 72 hours.
Existing travel restrictions on travel into the country from Britain will end on Sunday, the minister confirmed in a statement released by Portugal's tourist board, Visit Portugal.
Live COVID updates from the UK and around the world
It follows earlier uncertainty after the Portuguese government extended its "state of calamity".
It later emerged that this was in relation to domestic issues with coronavirus which could involve local lockdowns or mandatory mask wearing in some settings.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced on Tuesday that as of 17 May the "stay in the UK" restriction will lift, meaning people will be able to travel to green list countries such as Portugal without self-isolating on their return.
The latest announcement will come as a relief for holiday firms which have reported huge demand for trips to Portugal following the publication of the green list.
Visit Portugal said it had put together a COVID register of 22,400 businesses and 23,000 tourism workers to create "another layer of the trust and transparency strategy which Portugal has been implementing to manage the pandemic."
"People from the United Kingdom have visited Portugal and celebrated our culture, traditions, landmarks, history, and enjoyed our warm hospitality for decades," it added.
Follow the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
"We look forward to welcome all travellers coming from the UK. "
EasyJet has added 105,000 extra seats to its flights serving green tier destinations, while TUI plans to use aircraft which normally operate long-haul routes to accommodate the surge of people booked to fly to there.
Thousands of British football fans are hoping to travel to Porto in mainland Portugal for the all-English Champions League final between Manchester City and Chelsea on 29 May.
UEFA previously confirmed that 6,000 tickets would be made available to each of the finalists, with the final capacity limit at the Estadio do Dragao still to be fixed.
Paul Charles, chief executive of travel consultancy The PC Agency, said: "It's green for go from Monday.
"Overseas travel will restart as scheduled in the prime minister's road map and well done to Portugal for making it happen.
"Travel can be done safely and responsibly. We now need to see a wider green list from the start of June."
Portugal is the only southern European country to so far make Britain's green list of quarantine-free destinations.
In neighbouring Spain, trade and tourism minister Reyes Maroto said her government is in "constant" consultations with Britain to try to have its travel status upgraded.
Italy will scrap mandatory quarantine for travellers from the EU, UK and Israel who test negative for COVID, the country's government has said. Italy remains on the UK's amber travel list.
Croatia, Cyprus Greece and Malta - all amber list countries - are all also opening up to tourists.
Turkey will allow UK travellers in without having to pass a coronavirus test from Monday - it is currently on the travel red list put out by the British government.
Visitors from China, Australia and 13 other countries will also be allowed in test-free.
"Red list: Hotel-quarantine for 10 days & pre-departure test, plus PCR test on day 2 and 8.
Amber list: Home-quarantine for 10 days & pre-departure test, plus PCR test on day 2 and 8. ""Test to release"" option on day 5. Different rules apply for fully vaccinated people arriving from EU countries and US.
Green list: Pre-departure test & PCR test on or before day 2.
You do not need to take a COVID-19 test or quarantine on arrival in England if you are travelling within the Common Travel Area"
SOURCE: Department for Transport. Countries in the Common Travel Area: the UK, Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. Travel restrictions may differ in Scotland Wales and Northern Ireland. Regions in some nations may have been put into a different category than the rest of the country. Data updated at 21:01 04 August 2021
A plan to roll out 120 million rapid-diagnostic tests for coronavirus to help lower and middle-income countries make up ground in a testing gap with richer countries has been agreed.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) and leading partners are to go ahead with the project despite it not being fully funded yet.
An emergency-use listing was issued by the WHO last week for the antigen-based rapid COVID-19 diagnostic tests which cost $5 (£3.90) each.
The programme initially requires $600m (£467m) and is to get started as early as next month to provide better access to areas where it is harder to reach with PCR tests that are often used in wealthier nations.
The rapid tests look for antigens, or proteins found on the surface of the virus. They are generally considered less accurate - though much faster - than higher-grade genetic tests, known as PCR tests.
PCR tests require processing with specialised lab equipment and chemicals. Typically that turnaround takes several days to deliver results to patients.
WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said: "These tests provide reliable results in approximately 15 to 30 minutes, rather than hours or days, at a lower price with less sophisticated equipment.
"This will enable the expansion of testing, particularly in hard-to-reach areas that do not have lab facilities or enough trained health workers to carry out PCR tests.
"We have an agreement, we have seed funding and now we need the full amount of funds to buy these tests."
Catharina Boehme, chief executive of a non-profit group called the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, said the rollout would be in 20 countries in Africa, and would rely on support of groups including the Clinton Health Access Initiative.
She said the diagnostic tests will be provided by SD Biosensor and Abbott.
Rolling out testing in poorer countries aims to help healthcare workers get a better grip on where the virus is circulating, in the hope of following up with containment and other measures to stop it.
Coronavirus testing services could become overwhelmed due to rising infections, government scientists have warned - as it was confirmed a new variant is under investigation in the UK.
More than 30,000 new cases of the Delta variant have been recorded in the UK since last week, according to Public Health England, bringing the total to 286,765.
Delta, first identified in India, now accounts for 99% of new coronavirus cases and is helping to fuel a third wave.
Experts on the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M) government advisory panel have warned testing is likely to come under strain due to increasing demand.
In an official document published on Thursday, Spi-M said: "As cases continue to rise, it will become more challenging to ensure provision of testing at the scale and timeliness currently seen across England, either regionally or nationally, if testing capacity does not keep pace with increases in infections."
Ministers have suggested that daily testing for certain vital sections of the economy will help end shortages and a staffing crisis created by the so-called "pingemic".
On Thursday, it was announced that critical workers and those in vital public services will be able to avoid the need to self-isolate if identified as a contact of a coronavirus case by the NHS app, and instead take daily COVID tests.
Everyone else who is fully jabbed will be able to skip isolation from 16 August, provided they take a PCR test and are negative.
The scientists' warning comes as it was announced a new coronavirus variant is under investigation by Public Health England (PHE).
Experts are analysing instances of the B.1.621 variant found in pockets of the UK.
To date, 16 cases have been detected, although the majority are linked to overseas travel and there is no evidence of community transmission.
B.1.621 has been found in other countries including Colombia (325 sequenced cases), the US (264 sequenced cases) and Spain (196 sequenced cases).
There is no evidence it causes more severe illness or renders the current vaccines on offer any less effective.
Updated figures from PHE show the Delta variant may be 46% more likely to cause reinfection than the Alpha variant first identified in Kent.
It has overtaken the Beta variant - first found in South Africa - which currently accounts for less than 0.2% of cases in the UK.
The data shows that, while the overall chances of getting reinfected are very low, the Delta variant poses a higher risk.
The figures also showed the breakdown of how many people in hospital with the Delta variant have had one or both doses of a COVID-19 vaccine.
Between 21 June and 19 July, 1,788 people were admitted to hospital after testing positive for the Delta variant, the data shows.
Of these, 970 (54.3%) were unvaccinated, while 530 (29.6%) were fully vaccinated.
In total, 3,692 people have been hospitalised with Delta, of whom 2,152 (58.3%) were unvaccinated and 843 (22.8%) were fully vaccinated.
From February to mid-July, among the under-50s who had received both vaccines just four patients died with the Delta variant out of 15,346 cases in this group (0.02%).
There have been 34 deaths among the unvaccinated in the same age group, among 119,063 Delta cases (0.02%).
Meanwhile, among the over-50s who have received both vaccinations there have been 220 deaths out of 13,427 cases (1.64%).
And there have been 131 deaths among the unvaccinated over-50s among 2,337 cases (5.6%).
To date 87.9% of the UK population have received at least one COVID vaccine and 69.5% have had two doses.
Dr Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, said: "This most recent hospitalisation data shows once again just how crucial vaccination is in protecting us from severe illness and death
"As we emerge from restrictions and vaccine coverage continues to rise, it is important to remember that while the protection provided by vaccination is excellent, it is not total."
The UK reported a slight decrease in coronavirus cases on Friday and on Thursday.
Government figures show 36,389 new cases were reported on Friday. A drop on the 39,906 cases were reported on Thursday, which itself was down almost 18% from the previous Thursday's figure of 48,553 cases.
However, an expert warned that the cases figure was not representative of real-time infections due to the lag in reporting times and that the impact of most restrictions lifting in England is yet to be seen.
Paul Hunter, professor in medicine at the Norwich School of Medicine, University of East Anglia said: "It is still too early to see any impact of the relaxations of Monday 19 (July) and some of the reduction in cases will be because of many children no longer being tested as regularly now schools are closed.
Subscribe to the All Out Politics podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
"I would caution that this may just be a temporary slowing in reports before we start to see a return to exponential growth towards the end of next week as a result of the ending of restrictions last week".
Prof Hunter said we will not know for certain if the third wave is tailing off until 9 August - three weeks after 19 July.
"But there are some positive signs. If you look at the course of the Delta epidemic from early May it was clear that the rate of increase in cases was already slowing by June," he said.
The boss of Test and Trace has defended the £37bn service, dismissing a critical report by MPs as "old news".
In a rare interview, Dido Harding said England's Test and Trace service was "an essential component in the fight against COVID" and promised it would be carrying on for some time to come.
Live COVID updates from the UK and around the world
Asked about its cost, she said it was "an awful lot less than £37bn", but added that large sums were necessary to deliver testing - which she claimed accounted for around 80% of the budget - at mass scale.
During Prime Minister's Questions on Wednesday, Boris Johnson also backed the programme, telling MPs: "It's thanks to NHS Test and Trace that we're able to send kids back to school and begin cautiously and irreversibly to reopen our economy and restart our lives."
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps defended Test and Trace in an interview with Sky News, saying the pandemic would have been "one heck of a lot worse" without it.
"It certainly hasn't been cheap fighting coronavirus but it's absolutely been necessary," he said when asked about the funding provided to Test and Trace.
"9.1 million people have been contacted by Test and Trace. These are people who otherwise would be wandering round often unaware that they had coronavirus and spreading it around further."
The controversial service was given another £15bn in government cash in last week's budget, taking its total funding to £37bn over two years.
Experts said the sum was "vast" and gave Test and Trace a budget equivalent to the entire system of public safety, including prisons, police and criminal courts.
Yet a report released today by a committee of MPs said that despite having access to "unimaginable resources", it still wasn't clear whether Test and Trace was working effectively.
The cross-party Public Accounts Committee said that although Test and Trace had failed in its primary mission of preventing lockdown, it had increased testing and tracing hugely since the start of the pandemic.
But the MPs said it was still impossible to tell whether Test and Trace was making a difference, because the data it produced did not contain "clear evidence" to prove that it was reducing the spread of the virus.
The committee's chair, Labour MP Meg Hillier, called on the government to produce a clear plan for its "staggering investment," saying: "British taxpayers cannot be treated by government like an ATM machine."
Baroness Harding disputed the claim, saying Test and Trace published extensive data and "was meeting the targets set by SAGE".
The Public Accounts Committee was particularly concerned by Test and Trace's reliance on highly-paid consultants from firms such as Deloitte, Accenture and McKinsey, saying it needed to "wean itself off" their use.
Test and Trace currently employs around 2,500 consultants, who are paid an estimated average daily rate of around £1,100, going up as high as £6,624 - rates Baroness Harding defended as "very competitive".
Royal College of Nursing chief executive and general secretary Dame Donna Kinnair said the report would reignite the debate over NHS pay, after the government advised that health service staff should receive a 1% pay rise.
"Nursing staff who have been offered a 1% pay increase will be furious to hear of the millions of pounds being spent on private-sector consultants," she said.
Asked about this, Baroness Harding said that "NHS staff and social workers are our most important customers everyday they use our tests to help protect themselves and patients".
Other issues raised by the Public Accounts Committee included the lack of coordination with local government when the service was started and low levels of self-isolation, often because of financial hardship.
Baroness Harding said both issues were being resolved at the same time.
"There is money in the budget to support self isolation payments and government recently said there will be an extension," she said.
"It's an important part of what we're doing, working with local authority and government to provide the support people need. We know that we have to keep working on practical and financial support."
Asked about the report from the Public Accounts Committee, she dismissed it as "old news," saying it only went up to the end of October: "basically half our life."
Although Test and Trace has a £37bn budget, it is not known how much money it has actually spent, nor what its future plans are.
The MPs found that it had spent £5.7bn up to November 2020, less than its budget for the period, although that was before it bought 800,000 lateral flow tests to use in schools.
Alex Thomas, a former senior civil servant who now works for the Institute for Government think tank, said there was a "pretty high chance that a lot of that money won't get spent".
But he added that the sums involved were "a huge sum of money to spend on one particular system and one part of government" and would inevitably have repercussions across government.
"Inevitably, when you've got a bit of government that has this huge whacking great budget, that's going to change the sorts of decisions that ministers make," he told Sky News.
"It's going to change where people are working and who's got the power."
England's estimated R number has fallen to between 0.8 and 1.1, suggesting the pandemic could be shrinking.
Last week, it was between 1.1 and 1.4.
An R value - or reproduction number - between 0.8 and 1.1 means on average every 10 people infected with COVID-19 will infect between eight and 11 others.
The daily growth rate of infections in England is estimated at between -3% and 1%, according to the figures from the United Kingdom Health Security Agency.
Latest COVID updates from the UK and around the world
It is down on the previous week when cases were believed to be growing by between 2% and 5%.
The estimates represent the situation two to three weeks ago, due to the delay between someone being infected, developing symptoms, and needing healthcare.
The North West region and the North East and Yorkshire have the lowest estimated range of 0.7-1.0.
The South East, London and East of England have a slightly higher estimate than the England average, at 0.9-1.2.
It comes as coronavirus infection rates have fallen in all home nations apart from Northern Ireland, according to other official estimates.
Data from the Office for National Statistics shows that in the week ending 31 July, approximately one in 75 people in private households in England (722,300 positive cases) were estimated to have had COVID-19.
This compares with one in 65 people (865,200) the previous week.
In Scotland, the latest figure was one in 120 (43,000 infections), compared with one in 110 (49,500) the week before.
In Wales, one in 230 people (13,000 cases) were estimated to have had coronavirus in the last week of July, while it was one in 160 (18,800) in the previous seven days.
In contrast, in Northern Ireland, infection rates have risen, with one in 55 people (34,400) thought to have had COVID, compared with one in 65 (27,200) a week earlier.
The ONS Infection Survey tests tens of thousands of people in private households around the country to produce its estimates.
The UK government is set to relax restrictions for visiting a handful of countries under a new traffic light system, with ministers expected to say which countries will be on the "green list" as soon as Friday.
Those returning to England from nations on the green list will need to take a pre-departure COVID-19 test and also a post-arrival test, but they will not need to self-isolate.
People coming from countries on the amber list will have to take a pre-departure test, and tests on day two and day eight of their arrival.
They will also be required to self-isolate for 10 days, unless they receive a negative result from an optional private test on day five of their arrival (test to release scheme), and can end their quarantine early.
The red list requires a 10-night stay in a government-sanctioned quarantine hotel at a cost of £1,750 for travellers who will also need to take COVID tests before and after they arrive in England.
Many European nations are doing all they can to attract tourists this summer. But for many Britons, a destination with a low infection rate might be the clincher.
The UK's rapid vaccine rollout and the long winter lockdown means infection rates are lower here than many holiday destinations.
PORTUGAL
Portugal, which imposed a lockdown in January to curb what was then the world's worst COVID-19 surge, also has a relatively low infection rate.
The country started lifting restrictions last month and has since reopened some schools, restaurant and cafe terraces, museums and hair salons.
GREECE
However Greece, where a fifth of jobs and GDP depend on tourism, is battling one of Europe's highest coronavirus-linked death rates.
Greece's prime minister has blamed vaccine hesitancy among the elderly for the persistently high rates of death and hospitalisations.
Meanwhile, the country has said it will invite vaccinated Britons into the country without the need for tests, while Spain, Portugal and France have said they will offer similar in the coming weeks.
European nations are also speeding up their vaccinations ahead the summer travel season.
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen has said the bloc has now administered 150 million doses.
She added: "A quarter of all Europeans have had their first dose.
"We'll have enough doses for vaccinating 70% of EU adults in July."
SPAIN
Spain, the most popular tourist destination for Britons prior to the pandemic, has varying infection rates throughout the country.
Some regions in northern Spain have restrictions on travel while others have reopened bars until 1am.
SPANISH ISLANDS
Mallorca, Menorca, Ibiza, and Formentera, which make up the Balearic Islands, have a relatively low level of infections compared to mainland Spain.
Earlier this week the Foreign Office stopped advising against non-essential travel to Portugal, excluding the Azores, the Greek islands of Rhodes, Kos, Zante, Corfu and Crete and the Canary Islands in Spain, which include Tenerife, Fuerteventura, Grand Canaria and Lanzarote.
UNITED STATES
The US, also among the most visited by British tourists prior to the pandemic, is seeing varying levels of infection rates across the country.
It was also among the first to relax rules around COVID-19 as it sped up its vaccination programme.
In some areas of the US, more people in their 20s are now being treated in hospital for COVID-19 than people in their 70s.
Ministers plan to review the traffic light system for international travel at the end of June, before the holiday season begins, which could see vaccinated people able to avoid quarantining.
The hope is that more of Europe will be on the "green list" by this point as many countries impose tougher restrictions to control a third wave of infection.
People in England will be able to enjoy quarantine-free travel to more than a dozen countries and territories when international travel resumes later this month.
Under the government's roadmap for easing COVID-19 restrictions in England, foreign travel will be allowed from 17 May - but the devolved governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have yet to announce plans for foreign travel.
People who have had both doses of a coronavirus vaccine will be able to provide proof of their vaccination status on the NHS app once foreign travel resumes.
Those who do not have the app - which is different to the COVID one many people will have on their phones - will be able to request an NHS letter from 17 May.
Portugal, Israel and Gibraltar are among the nations on the government's green travel list.
This means people will be able to visit these countries and not have to isolate upon their return, provided they test negative for the virus after their arrival.
Australia, New Zealand and Singapore are also on the green list, but people will not be able to travel there on holiday as they are closed to UK tourists.
People returning from nations on the amber list will have to isolate for a minimum of five days and take at least two COVID tests.
Travellers will have to cover the costs of the tests themselves.
Popular European holiday destinations like Spain, Italy, France and Greece are on the amber list.
Turkey, the Maldives and Nepal have become the latest countries to be added to the red list, effective from 4am on Wednesday.
People arriving from red list destinations have to quarantine in a designated hotel for 11 nights at a cost of £1,750 for solo travellers.
Speaking at a Downing Street news conference, Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said the lifting of restrictions on international travel was "necessarily cautious" and ministers must "make absolutely sure" the countries the UK reconnects with are safe.
He said: "We in this country have managed to construct a fortress against COVID. But the disease is still prevalent in other parts of the world, most notably at the moment in India.
"In fact, more new cases of COVID have been diagnosed around the world in the last seven days than at any time since the pandemic began."
Subscribe to the Daily podcast on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, Spreaker
Mr Shapps added: "That's why today's announcement, removing the stay in the UK restrictions from May 17, is necessarily cautious.
"We must make absolutely sure that the countries we reconnect with are safe, that their infection rates are low and their vaccination rates are high.
"It means making sure we are not incubating the most dangerous variants that they're not and that they have safe and secure surveillance in place."
Border Force director Paul Lincoln warned that waiting times to enter the UK would likely be longer than normal once international travel begins again.
"There will continue to be additional health checks for every person crossing our border and inevitably that means it will take longer for most people to enter the UK," he said.
Destinations have been categorised using a variety of factors.
This includes the proportion of its population that has been vaccinated, rates of infection, emerging new variants, and its access to reliable scientific data and genomic sequencing.
The designations will be periodically reviewed, with the potential for more countries being added to the green list in the weeks and months to come if their COVID situation improves.
The first review is scheduled to take place on 28 June, followed by further assessments no later than 31 July and then 1 October.
Mr Shapps told the Downing Street briefing that it "may take a few days" for Scotland and Wales to set out their plans due to election counts.
The transport secretary said he had a call with the devolved administrations earlier on Friday, with the UK's four chief medical officers having "met and agreed the principles" of the traffic light system.
"Red list: Hotel-quarantine for 10 days & pre-departure test, plus PCR test on day 2 and 8.
Amber list: Home-quarantine for 10 days & pre-departure test, plus PCR test on day 2 and 8. ""Test to release"" option on day 5. Different rules apply for fully vaccinated people arriving from EU countries and US.
Green list: Pre-departure test & PCR test on or before day 2.
You do not need to take a COVID-19 test or quarantine on arrival in England if you are travelling within the Common Travel Area"
SOURCE: Department for Transport. Countries in the Common Travel Area: the UK, Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. Travel restrictions may differ in Scotland Wales and Northern Ireland. Regions in some nations may have been put into a different category than the rest of the country. Data updated at 21:01 04 August 2021
Travellers entering Britain from COVID-19 hotspots now have to quarantine in hotels.
The tightening of rules follows the emergence of new variants of the virus in South Africa and Brazil.
From 15 February, travellers returning to England from "red list" countries have to quarantine in government-provided accommodation for 10 days, paid for by the traveller.
Anyone returning to Scotland must quarantine in a hotel, not just from red list countries.
Sky News takes a look at how hotel quarantine works.
Which travellers will have to quarantine in hotels?
Any British or Irish nationals or anybody resident in the UK who is arriving in England and has visited or passed through 33 "red list" countries will be placed in quarantine in government-provided hotels for 10 days.
The red list countries are:
Angola, Argentina, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ecuador, Eswatini, French Guiana, Guyana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Seychelles, South Africa, Suriname, Tanzania, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Anybody entering Scotland from overseas will have to quarantine in a hotel for 10 days.
Foreign nationals and non-UK residents from those destinations are already banned from entering the UK.
Why is the measure being introduced?
Hotel quarantine is being brought in as a way to ensure people follow self-isolation rules when returning from certain countries where coronavirus cases are high or rising.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the move is aimed at preventing new COVID variants from reaching the UK.
What must people arriving from a "red list" country do before arriving in England?
Under the new rules, travellers must have a negative COVID test during the three days before arriving in the UK.
Passengers must book a government-approved quarantine hotel via the government's website and complete a passenger locator form with details of that hotel along with a quarantine package booking reference number.
Travellers will have to agree to pay for the quarantine passage before they complete the form and start their journey to the UK.
They can only arrive into Heathrow, Gatwick, London City, Birmingham and Farnborough airports. If red list country passengers arrive into a different airport they can be fined up to £10,000 plus the cost of hotel quarantine.
If a person coming from a red list country does not arrange a quarantine package prior to arrival in England, there is a penalty of up to £4,000 plus the cost of hotel quarantine.
What will happen when people arrive in the UK from a "red list" country?
Passengers will be met at passport control in the airport and be guided through baggage reclaim and customs before being transported directly to their booked hotel.
Anybody with a car parked at the airport will need to extend their parking period and pay the additional charges.
What will the 10-day quarantine be like?
The day a person arrives at the hotel will be day zero.
Travellers will then have to stay in their rooms for a further 10 days, with security guards accompanying them if they go outside for fresh air or limited exercise with special permission from security.
Needing to smoke is "not a reason to go outside" and is not allowed in rooms, the government said.
The rooms will have been left empty for three days before and are deep cleaned between each guest, with the air conditioning set to not recirculate air between rooms.
Every guest, apart from children under five-years-old, will have to take a coronavirus test on or before day two and day eight, with the kits left outside their hotel room and collected by hotel security.
Anybody who does not take the tests may face a fine of up to £2,000 and have their quarantine stay extended.
If a day eight test's results are not received before the end of day 10 then guests will have to stay in quarantine.
Anybody who receives a positive test, and anybody with them, will have to quarantine for a 10 further days from that day.
This means, if someone tests positive on or after day eight of their stay, they will be required to quarantine for a total of 18 days with an additional charge of £152 per day beyond the initial 10 days of quarantine.
All rooms have a television, wifi, tea and coffee making facilities, basic toiletries, disposable cleaning products and a laundry service will be available.
Food, which can be chosen from a menu daily, will be left on trays outside rooms three times a day, along with fresh fruit, water and soft drinks - all included in the quarantine package.
Guests can order room service 24 hours a day and can order in delivery to reception which staff will bring up.
How much will the quarantine measure cost?
The cost of the package for one adult in one room for 10 days, 11 nights, is £1,750.
For every other person over the age of 12 in the same room it is an additional £650 or £325 for children aged five to 12.
Children under five will not have to be paid for, with the government bearing the cost of food and drink for three to five-year-olds.
What happens at the end of hotel quarantine?
If a traveller receives a second negative test they can leave after day 10.
They will be transported back to the airport they arrived in and can make their way back home from there.
Which hotels are included?
Quarantine hotels will be near the five airports included in the scheme, as well as near Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow airports in Scotland, where all arrivals must quarantine in the designated hotels.
Best Western, Novotel and the Radisson hotel chains are included in the hotel quarantine initiative.
England is far from being the first nation to introduce the policy.
Here's how it has worked in other countries.
Mandatory hotel quarantine was introduced in Australia at the end of March 2020, one of the first countries to do so.
The hotels are designated by the government and determined on the day a person arrives.
People have to quarantine for at least 14 days, and up to 24 days if they refuse to be tested, or until they are clear of infection if they test positive.
They are transported to hotels by bus from the airport and meals are dropped off outside their room doors, with one delivery meal a day allowed to be ordered in.
The cost for a single traveller in New South Wales is about $3,000 (£1,695) for the fortnight, which is invoiced by the government when you leave.
At the airport, travellers into China have to fill in a variety of forms, get their temperatures checked and a COVID test.
Travellers are taken by bus to state-designated hotels, with no information given about which hotel beforehand.
Hotel staff wearing PPE call at least twice a day to record everybody's temperatures, with a thermometer given to those quarantining when they arrive.
A COVID test is taken after a week and then just before the end of quarantine.
Food, included in the final price, is provided but the quality and quantity vary dramatically and some hotels do not allow outside delivery or alcohol.
The cost for a fortnight for one traveller (unmarried couples may be separated) is between RMB4,200 and RMB7,000 (£470 and £790).
All arrivals into Hong Kong, apart from China, Macau and Taiwan, have to quarantine in designated hotels for 21 days. Passengers from those three countries have a 14-day quarantine.
Travellers have to provide proof of a room reservation at a designated hotel before they can board their flight.
Coaches at half capacity take passengers - who have tested negative at the airport - to their booked hotel, where they will be tested on the 12th and 19th day.
Three meals a day, included in the cost, will be provided by the hotel and most allow food and other deliveries.
Prices for one person for 21 days range from $10,080 to $1,039,500 (£950 to £98,000).
Arrivals to most Indian states have to quarantine in a hotel (own expense) or government facility (paid for) for at least seven days, then if a COVID test is negative they can spend the remaining seven days in home quarantine.
People have to download an app and fill in health updates during their quarantine.
Costs range from INR10,500 to INR28,000 (£105 to £280) for one person for a week.
International travellers have to undergo quarantine at a designated hotel for five days.
Before that, they have to have a negative PCR within 72 hours before departure and a PCR test on arrival.
People travelling onwards to the popular tourist destination of Bali will require a negative test no more than 48 hours before departure.
Those arriving in New Zealand have to stay in isolation for at least 14 days at designated hotels, and up to 28 days if you refuse a test.
Everyone flying to New Zealand must have a voucher confirming they have been allocated a hotel room before they can book their flight.
A COVID test is taken within 24 hours of arrival, health staff check your health and wellbeing daily, and more tests are taken on day three and 12.
Three meals a day are provided and food and limited alcohol delivery is allowed.
There is a flat rate of $3,100 (£1,633) for one person, $950 (£500) for each additional adult in the room, and $475 (£250) for each child above the age of three in the room.
Incoming passengers must quarantine at a government-approved hotel for 14 days.
They have to take a PCR test at the airport and are taken to the hotel on a bus provided by the Coast Guard, or book a government-approved taxi.
Three meals are provided a day and food delivery is allowed.
The government is footing the bill for overseas Filipino workers who must quarantine.
Those entering Qatar have to quarantine in a government-approved hotel for seven days, with a few dedicated four or five-star quarantine hotels for UK arrivals.
A hotel package must be booked before flying and arrivals must have a COVID test at the airport before having another one on day six.
A transfer will be provided to the hotel where medical teams will be available 24/7 and three meals a day will be provided.
Packages cost between QAR2,724 and QAR4,016 per person for seven days (£548 to £810).
All arrivals must isolate in a government-designated hotel - only revealed once they get to it - for two weeks.
A negative PCR test within 72 hours before departure is needed, then one at the airport and another at the end of quarantine - those must be paid for.
Travellers will be taken to a hotel by bus and must have travel insurance to cover COVID-19 treatment and hospital costs if needed.
They must apply for hotel quarantine before arriving in Singapore and will be given an electronic monitoring bracelet or smartwatch to ensure they remain in their room.
The quarantine cost, which includes three meals a day, is about $2,000 (£1,100), not including $200 (£110) for each test.
All international arrivals need to provide a negative PCR test issued within three working days before boarding their flight, and upon arrival.
A 14-day quarantine is required in a hotel, government-owned facilities or student dorms if travellers cannot guarantee only one person will be in a private home, unless they all flew there together.
Travellers will be transported to the facility, which they cannot choose, and will be provided three meals a day.
Rates range from NTD1,000 to NTD20,000 (£26 to £522) for one person for a fortnight.
International arrivals have to quarantine for 14 days in a government-approved hotel, with one COVID test on the fifth day and one at the end, plus twice daily temperature checks by nurses.
Hotels are offering packages in association with hospitals, including private airport transfer, ambulance to a hospital if needed, three meals a day, a nurse on duty and daily health monitoring - but alcohol is banned by the government.
After the initial PCR test comes back negative, many are offering access to limited hotel facilities such as the pool area, golf course and spa.
Packages cost from 26,500 THB to 600,000 THB (£646 to £14,650).
